<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 13-3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-864" id="noteref-864" epub:type="noteref">864</a></h4>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-lu</span> said, "The ruler of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> has been waiting for you, in order with you to administer the government. What will you consider the first thing to be done?"<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-865" id="noteref-865" epub:type="noteref">865</a></p>
			<p>The Master replied, "What is necessary is to rectify names."<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-866" id="noteref-866" epub:type="noteref">866</a></p>
			<p>"So, indeed!" said <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-lu</span>. "You are wide of the mark! Why must there be such rectification?"</p>
			<p>The Master said, "How uncultivated you are, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yu</span>! A superior man, in regard to what he does not know, shows a cautious reserve.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-867" id="noteref-867" epub:type="noteref">867</a></p>
			<p>"If names be not correct, language is not in accordance with the truth of things. If language be not in accordance with the truth of things, affairs cannot be carried on to success.</p>
			<p>"When affairs cannot be carried on to success, proprieties and music will not flourish. When proprieties and music do not flourish, punishments will not be properly awarded. When punishments are not properly awarded, the people do not know how to move hand or foot.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-868" id="noteref-868" epub:type="noteref">868</a></p>
			<p>"Therefore a superior man considers it necessary that the names he uses may be spoken <em>appropriately</em>, and also that what he speaks may be carried out <em>appropriately</em>. What the superior man requires, is just that in his words there may be nothing incorrect."</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
