<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 10-8</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-683" id="noteref-683" epub:type="noteref">683</a></h4>
			<p>He did not dislike to have his rice finely cleaned, nor to have his minced meat cut quite small.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-684" id="noteref-684" epub:type="noteref">684</a></p>
			<p>He did not eat rice which had been injured by heat or damp and turned sour, nor fish or flesh which was gone. He did not eat what was discoloured, or what was of a bad flavour, nor anything which was ill-cooked, or was not in season.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-685" id="noteref-685" epub:type="noteref">685</a></p>
			<p>He did not eat meat which was not cut properly, nor what was served without its proper sauce.</p>
			<p>Though there might be a large quantity of meat, he would not allow what he took to exceed the due proportion for the rice. It was only in wine that he laid down no limit for himself, but he did not allow himself to be confused by it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-686" id="noteref-686" epub:type="noteref">686</a></p>
			<p>He did not partake of wine and dried meat bought in the market.</p>
			<p>He was never without ginger when he ate.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-687" id="noteref-687" epub:type="noteref">687</a></p>
			<p>He did not eat much.</p>
			<p>When he had been <em>assisting</em> at the prince's sacrifice, he did not keep the flesh <em>which he received</em> overnight. The flesh of his <em>family</em> sacrifice he did not keep over three days. If kept over three days, people could not eat it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-688" id="noteref-688" epub:type="noteref">688</a></p>
			<p>When eating, he did not converse. When in bed, he did not speak.</p>
			<p>Although his food might be coarse rice and vegetable soup, he would offer <em>a little of it</em> in sacrifice with a grave, respectful air.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-689" id="noteref-689" epub:type="noteref">689</a></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
