<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 17-21</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1248" id="noteref-1248" epub:type="noteref">1248</a></h4>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsai Wo</span> asked about the three years" mourning for <em>parents, saying</em> that one year was long enough.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1249" id="noteref-1249" epub:type="noteref">1249</a></p>
			<p>"If the superior man," said he, "abstains for three years from the observances of propriety, those observances will be quite lost. If for three years he abstains from music, music will be ruined.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1250" id="noteref-1250" epub:type="noteref">1250</a></p>
			<p>"<em>Within a year</em> the old grain is exhausted, and the new grain has sprung up, and, in procuring fire by friction, we go through all the changes of wood for that purpose. After a complete year, the mourning may stop."<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1251" id="noteref-1251" epub:type="noteref">1251</a></p>
			<p>The Master said, "If you were, <em>after a year</em>, to eat good rice, and wear embroidered clothes, would you feel at ease?" "I should," replied <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wo</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1252" id="noteref-1252" epub:type="noteref">1252</a></p>
			<p>The Master said, "If you can feel at ease, do it. But a superior man, during the whole period of mourning, does not enjoy pleasant food which he may eat, nor derive pleasure from music which he may hear. He also does not feel at ease, if he is comfortably lodged. Therefore he does not do <em>what you propose</em>. But now you feel at ease and may do it."</p>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsai Wo</span> then went out, and the Master said, "This shows <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yü</span>'s want of virtue. It is not till a child is three years old that it is allowed to leave the arms of its parents. And the three years" mourning is universally observed throughout the empire. Did <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yü</span> enjoy the three years" love of his parents?"<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1253" id="noteref-1253" epub:type="noteref">1253</a></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
