<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 16-1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1145" id="noteref-1145" epub:type="noteref">1145</a></h4>
			<p>The head of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi</span> family was going to attack <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuan-yü</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1146" id="noteref-1146" epub:type="noteref">1146</a></p>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan Yu</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi-lu</span> had an interview with Confucius, and said, "<em>Our chief</em>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi</span>, is going to commence operations against <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuan-yü</span>."<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1147" id="noteref-1147" epub:type="noteref">1147</a></p>
			<p>Confucius said, "<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽiu</span>, is it not you who are in fault here?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1148" id="noteref-1148" epub:type="noteref">1148</a></p>
			<p>"Now, in regard to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuan-yü</span>, long ago, a former king appointed its ruler to preside over <em>the sacrifices</em> to the eastern <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng</span>; moreover, it is in the midst of the territory of our state; and its ruler is a minister in direct connexion with the sovereign:—What has <em>your chief</em> to do with attacking it?"<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1149" id="noteref-1149" epub:type="noteref">1149</a></p>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan Yu</span> said, "Our master wishes the thing; neither of us two ministers wishes it."<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1150" id="noteref-1150" epub:type="noteref">1150</a></p>
			<p>Confucius said, "<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽiu</span>, there are the words of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou Jên</span>,—'When he can put forth his ability, he takes his place in the ranks <em>of office</em>; when he finds himself unable to do so, he retires from it. How can he be used as a guide to a blind man, who does not support him when tottering, nor raise him up when fallen?'<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1151" id="noteref-1151" epub:type="noteref">1151</a></p>
			<p>"And further, you speak wrongly. When a tiger or rhinoceros escapes from his cage; when a tortoise or piece of jade is injured in its repository:—whose is the fault?"<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1152" id="noteref-1152" epub:type="noteref">1152</a></p>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan Yu</span> said, "But at present, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuan-yü</span> is strong and near to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pi</span>; if <em>our chief</em> do not now take it, it will hereafter be a sorrow to his descendants."</p>
			<p>Confucius said. "<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽiu</span>, the superior man hates that declining to say—'I want such and such a thing,' and framing explanations <em>for the conduct</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1153" id="noteref-1153" epub:type="noteref">1153</a></p>
			<p>"I have heard that rulers of states and chiefs of families are not troubled lest their people should be few, but are troubled lest they should not keep their several places; that they are not troubled with fears of poverty, but are troubled with fears of a want of contented repose <em>among the people in their several places</em>. For when the people keep their several places, there will be no poverty; when harmony prevails, there will be no scarcity of people; and when there is such a <em>contented</em> repose, there will be no rebellious upsettings.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1154" id="noteref-1154" epub:type="noteref">1154</a></p>
			<p>"So it is.—Therefore, if remoter people are not submissive, all the influences of civil culture and virtue are to be cultivated to attract them to be so; and when they have been so attracted, they must be made contented and tranquil.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1155" id="noteref-1155" epub:type="noteref">1155</a></p>
			<p>"Now, here are you, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yu</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽiu</span>, assisting your chief. Remoter people are not submissive, and, <em>with your help</em>, he cannot attract them to him. In his own territory there are divisions and downfalls, leavings and separations, and, <em>with your help</em>, he cannot preserve it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1156" id="noteref-1156" epub:type="noteref">1156</a></p>
			<p>"And yet he is planning these hostile movements within the state.—I am afraid that the sorrow of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi-sun</span> <em>family</em> will not be on account of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuan-yü</span>, but will be found within the screen of their own court."<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1157" id="noteref-1157" epub:type="noteref">1157</a></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
