<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 20-1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1356" id="noteref-1356" epub:type="noteref">1356</a></h4>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yao</span> said, "Oh! you, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shun</span>, the Heaven-determined order of succession now rests in your person. Sincerely hold fast the due mean. If there shall be distress and want within the four seas, the heavenly revenue will come to a perpetual end."<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1357" id="noteref-1357" epub:type="noteref">1357</a></p>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shun</span> also used the same language in giving charge to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yü</span>.</p>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> said, "I the child <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lü</span>, presume to use a dark-coloured victim, and presume to announce to Thee, O most great and sovereign God, that the sinner I dare not pardon, and thy ministers, O God, I do not keep in obscurity. The examination of them is by thy mind, O God. If, in my person, I commit offences, they are not to be attributed to you, <em>the people of</em> the myriad regions. If you in the myriad regions commit offences, these offences must rest on my person."<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1358" id="noteref-1358" epub:type="noteref">1358</a></p>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> conferred great gifts, and the good were enriched.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1359" id="noteref-1359" epub:type="noteref">1359</a></p>
			<p>"Although he has his near relatives, they are not equal to <em>my</em> virtuous men. The people are throwing blame upon me, the one man."<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1360" id="noteref-1360" epub:type="noteref">1360</a></p>
			<p>He carefully attended to the weights and measures, examined the body of the laws, restored the discarded officers, and the good government of the kingdom took its course.</p>
			<p>He revived states that had been extinguished, restored families whose line of succession had been broken, and called to office those who had retired into obscurity, so that throughout the kingdom the hearts of the people turned towards him.</p>
			<p>What he attached chief importance to, were the food of the people, the duties of mourning, and sacrifices.</p>
			<p>By his generosity, he won all. By his sincerity, he made the people repose trust in him. By his earnest activity, his achievements were great. By his justice, all were delighted.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
