<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><strong>Title of the work.</strong>&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant" epub:type="se:name.publication.book">論語</span>, "Discourses and Dialogues;" that is, the discourses or discussions of Confucius with his disciples and others on various topics, and his replies to their inquiries. Many chapters, however, and one whole book, are the sayings, not of the sage himself, but of some of his disciples. The characters may also be rendered "Digested Conversations," and this appears to be the more ancient signification attached to them, the account being that, after the death of Confucius, his disciples collected together and compared the memoranda of his conversations which they had severally preserved, digesting them into the twenty books which composed the work. Hence the title&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant" epub:type="se:name.publication.book">論語</span>, "Discussed Sayings," or "Digested Conversations." See <cite><span xml:lang="zh-Hant" epub:type="se:name.publication.book">論語註疏解經序</span></cite>. I have styled the work <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Confucian Analects</i>, as being more descriptive of its character than any other name I could think of. <a href="halftitle.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><strong>Heading of this book.</strong>&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">學而第一</span>. The two first characters in the book, after the introductory&#8212;"The Master said," are adopted as its heading. The is similar to the custom of the Jews, who name many books in the Bible from the first word in them. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">第一</span>, "The First;" that is, of the twenty books composing the whole work. In some of the books we find a unity or analogy of subjects, which evidently guided the compilers in grouping the chapters together. Others seem devoid of any such principle of combination. The sixteen chapters of this book are occupied, it is said, with the fundamental subjects which ought to engage the attention of the learner, and the great matters of human practice. The word <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">學</span>, "<em>learn</em>," rightly occupies the forefront in the studies of a nation, of which its educational system has so long been the distinction and glory. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The whole work and achievement of the learning, first perfecting his knowledge, then attracting by his fame like-minded individuals, and finally complete in himself.</b> <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子</span>, at the commencement, indicates Confucius. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子</span>, "a son," is also the common designation of males,&#8212;especially of virtuous men. We find it, in conversations, used in the same way as our "Sir." When it <em>follows</em> the surname, it is equivalent to our "<abbr>Mr.</abbr>" or may be rendered "the philosopher," "the scholar," "the officer," <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Often, however, it is better to leave it untranslated. When it <em>precedes</em> the surname, it indicates the person spoken of was the master of the writer, as <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子沈子</span>, "my master, the philosopher <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">沈</span>." Standing single and alone, as in the text, it denotes Confucius, <em>the philosopher</em>, or, rather, <em>the master</em>. If we render the term by Confucius, as all preceding translators have done, we miss the indication which it gives of the handiwork of his disciples, and the reverence which it bespeaks for him. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不亦...乎</span> is explained by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">豈不</span>, "is it not?" See <cite><span xml:lang="zh-Hant" epub:type="se:name.publication.book">四書補注備旨</span></cite>. To bring out the force of "also" in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">亦</span>, some say thus:&#8212;"The occasions for pleasure are many, <em>is this also one?</em>" But it is better to consider <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">亦</span> as merely redundant;&#8212;see <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Yin-chih's</span> masterly <cite><i epub:type="se.name.publication.book">Treatise</i> on the particles, <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span></cite>; it forms <abbr>chaps.</abbr> 1208 to 1217 of the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant" epub:type="se:name.publication.book">皇清經解</span>. <span class="spanzh">說</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">yüeh</i>, as always when it has the entering tone marked, stands for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">悅</span>. What is learned becomes by practice and application one's own, and hence arises complacent pleasure in the mastering mind. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">悅</span>, as distinguished from <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">樂</span> (<i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">lê</i>), in the next paragraph, is the internal, individual feeling of pleasure, and the other, its external manifestation, implying also companionship. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">學</span>, in the old commentators, is explained by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">誦</span>, "to read chantingly," "to discuss." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> interprets it by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">效</span>, "to imitate," and makes its results to be <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">明善而復初</span>, "the understanding of all excellence, and the bringing back original goodness." Subsequent scholars profess, for the most part, great admiration of this explanation. It is an illustration, to my mind, of the way in which <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> and his followers are continually being wise above what is written in the classical books. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">習</span> is the rapid and frequent motion of the wings of a bird in flying, used for "to repeat," "to practise." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> is the object of the third <abbr>pers</abbr> pronoun, and its antecedent is to be found in the pregnant meaning of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">學</span>. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">朋</span>, properly "fellow-students;" but, generally, individuals of the same class and character, like-minded. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">君子</span> I translate here&#8212;"a man of complete virtue." Literally, it is&#8212;"a princely man." See on <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子</span>, above. It is a technical term in Chinese moral writers, for which there is no exact correspondency in English, and which cannot be rendered always in the same way. See <i epub:type="se.name.publication.book">Morrison's Dictionary</i>, character <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子</span>. Its opposite is <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">小人</span>, "a small, mean man." <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">人不知</span>, "Men do not know him," but anciently some explained&#8212;"men do not know," that is, are stupid under his teaching. The interpretation in the text is, doubtless, the correct one. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Filial piety and fraternal submission are the foundation of all virtuous practice.</b> <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yu</span>, named <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">若</span>, and styled <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子有</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子若</span>, a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">魯</span>, was famed among the other disciples of Confucius for his strong memory, and love for the doctrines of antiquity. In something about him he resembled the sage. See <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mencius</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <abbr>Pt.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 13</cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">有子</span> is "<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yu</span>, the philosopher," and he and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng Shên</span> are the only two of Confucius's disciples who are mentioned in this style in the "<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yü</i>. This has led to an opinion on the part of some, that the work was compiled by the disciples. This may not be sufficiently supported, but I have not found the peculiarity pointed out satisfactorily explained. The tablet of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yu's</span> spirit is now in the same apartment of the sage's temples as that of the same himself, occupying the 6th place in the eastern range of "the wise ones." To this position it was promoted in the 3rd year of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien-lung</span> of the present dynasty. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鮮</span>, 3rd tone, = "few." <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A degree of activity enters into the meaning of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲</span> in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲人</span>, = "playing the man," "as men, showing themselves filial," <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">弟</span>, here = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">悌</span>, "to be submissive as a younger brother," is in the 4th tone. With its proper signification, it was anciently in the 3rd tone, an adjective, = "good." <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而</span> = "and yet," different from its simple conjunctive use = "and," in the preceding chapter. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">好</span>, a verb "to love," in the 4th tone, differs from the same character in the 3rd tone, an adjective, = "good." <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>One the idiom&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">未之有</span>, see <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><span xml:lang="fr">Prémare's</span> Grammar</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 156</cite>. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">君子</span> has a less intense signification here than in the last chapter. I translate&#8212;"The superior man," for want of a better term. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">本</span>, "the root," "what is radical," is here said of filial and fraternal duties. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道</span>, "ways" or "courses," of all that is intended by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲 (=行) 仁</span>, below. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The particles <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也者</span> resume the discourse about <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孝弟</span>, and introduce some further description of them. See <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><span xml:lang="fr">Prémare</span></i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 158</cite>. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仁</span> is explained here as "the principle of love," "the virtue of the heart." Mencius says&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仁也者人也</span>, "<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仁</span> is man," in accordance with which, Julien translates it by <i xml:lang="la">humanitas</i>. <em>Benevolence</em> often comes near it, but, as has been said before of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">君子</span>, we cannot give a uniform rendering of the term. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span>, in the 2nd tone, is half interrogative, an answer in the affirmative being implied. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Fair appearances are suspicious.</b> <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">巧言令色</span>,&#8212;see <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-Ching</i>, <span epub:type="z2998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 2</cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">巧</span>, "skill in workmanship;" then, "skill," "cleverness," generally, and sometimes with a bad meaning, as here, = "artful," "hypocritical." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">令</span>, "a law," "an order," also "good," and here like <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">巧</span>, with a bad meaning, = "pretending to be good." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">色</span>, "the manifestation of the feelings made in the colour of the countenance," is here used for the appearance generally. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How the philosopher <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng</span> daily examined himself, to guard against his being guilty of any imposition.</b> <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng</span>, whose name was <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">參</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shên</span>), and his designation <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子輿</span>, was one of the principal disciples of Confucius. A follower of the sage from his 16th year, though inferior in natural ability to some others, by his filial piety and other moral qualities, he entirely won the Master's esteem, and by persevering attention mastered his doctrines. Confucius, it is said, employed him in the composition of the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant" epub:type="se:name.publication.book">考經</span>, or <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Classics of Filial Piety</i>. The authorship of the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant" epub:type="se:name.publication.book">大學</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Great Learning</i>, is also ascribed to him, though incorrectly, as we shall see. Portions, moreover, of his composition are preserved in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Chi</i>. His spirit tablet among the sage's four assessors, occupying the first place on the west, has precedence of that of Mencius. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">省</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">hsing</i>, "to examine."  <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">身</span>, "the body", "one's personality;" <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">吾身</span> = <em>myself</em>. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">三省</span> is naturally understood of "three times," but the context and consent of commentators make us assent to the interpretation&#8212;"on three points." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲</span> is in the 4th tone, = "for." So, frequently, below. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">忠</span> from <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">中</span>, "middle," "the centre," and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">心</span>, "the heart," = loyalty, faithfulness, action with and from the heart. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">朋</span>, see <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span></cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">友</span>, "two hands joined," denoting union. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">朋友</span>, = when together, "friends." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">傳不習</span> is very enigmatical. The translation follows <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">何晏</span> explained quite differently: "whether I have given instruction in what I had not studied and practised?" It does seem more correct to take <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">傳</span> actively, "to give instruction," rather than passively, "to receive instruction." See <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mao Hsi-ho's</span> <cite><span xml:lang="zh-Hant" epub:type="se:name.publication.book">四書改錯</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span> article 17</cite>. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Fundamental principles for the government of a large state.</b> <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道</span> is used for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">導</span>, "to rule," "to lead," and is marked in the 4th tone, to distinguish it from <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道</span> the noun, which was anciently read with the 3rd tone. It is different from <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">治</span>, which refers to the actual business of government, while <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">導</span> is the duty and purpose thereof, apprehended by the prince. The standpoint of the principles in the prince's mind. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">乘</span>, in 4th tone, "a chariot," different from its meaning in the 2nd tone, "to ride." A country of 1000 chariot was one of the largest fiefs of the empire, which could bring such armament into the field. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The last principle,&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">使民以時</span>, means that the people should not be called from their husbandry at improper seasons, to do service on military expeditions and public works. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Rules for the training of the young:&#8212;Duty first and then accomplishments.</b> <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">弟子</span>, "younger brothers and sons," taken together, = <em>youths</em>, <em>a youth</em>. The 2nd <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">弟</span> is for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">悌</span> as in <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">入出</span>, "coming in, going out," = at home, abroad. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">汎</span> is explained by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">廣</span>, "wide," "widely;" its proper meaning is the rush or overflow of water. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">力</span>, "strength," here embracing the idea of <em>leisure</em>. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">學文</span>, not <em>literacy studies</em> merely, but all the accomplishments of a gentleman also:&#8212;ceremonies, music, archery, horsemanship, writing, and numbers. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-hsia's</span> views of the substance of learning.</b> <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-hsia</span> was the designation of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">卜商</span>, another of the sage's distinguished disciples, and now placed 5th in the eastern range of "the wise ones." He was greatly famed for his learning, and his views of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadgile">Chʽun Chʽiu</i> are said to be preserved in the commentaries of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">毛</span>, and of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公羊高</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">殼梁赤</span>. He wept himself blind of the death of his son, but lived to a great age, and was much esteemed by the people and princes of the time. With regard to the scope of this chapter, there is some truth in what the commentator <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">吳</span>, says,&#8212;that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-hsia's</span> words maybe wrested to depreciate learning, while those of the Master in the preceding chapter his exactly the due medium. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The 2nd <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">賢</span> is a concrete noun. Written in full, it is composed of the characters for a <em>minister</em>, <em>loyal</em>, and <em> a precious shell</em>. It conveys the ideas of <em>talents</em> and <em>worth</em> in the concrete, but it is not easy to render it uniformly by any one term of another language. The 1st <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">賢</span> is a verb, = "to treat as a <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">hsien</i>." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">色</span> has a different meaning from that in the 3rd chapter. Here it means "sensual pleasure." Literally rendered, the first sentence would be, "esteeming properly the virtuous, and changing the love of woman," and great fault is found by some, as in <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書改錯</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span></cite>, with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi's</span> interpretation which have followed; but there is force in what his adherents say, that the passage is not to be understood as if the individual spoken of had ever been given to pleasure, but simply signifies the sincerity of his love for the virtuous. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">致</span>, here = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">委</span>, "to give to," "to devote." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Principles of self-cultivation.</b> <a href="chapter-1-8.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">君子</span> has here its lightest meaning, = a <em> student</em>, one who wishes to be a <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chün-tzŭ</i>. <a href="chapter-1-8.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孔安國</span>, of the Han dynasty, in the 2nd century <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>, took <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">固</span>, in the sense "obscured," "dulled," and interprets&#8212;"Let him learn, and he will not fall into error." The received interpretation, as in the <abbr>transl.</abbr> is better. <a href="chapter-1-8.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">主</span>, as a verb, "to hold to be chief." It is often used thus.  <a href="chapter-1-8.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The object of friendship, with Chinese moralists, is to improve one's knowledge and virtue;&#8212;hence, this seemingly, but not really, selfish maxim. <a href="chapter-1-8.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The good effect of attention on the part of superiors to the offices to the dead:&#8212;An admonition of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng Shên</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-1-9.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">終</span>, "the end," = death, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">遠</span>, "distant," have both the force of adjectives = "the dead," and "the departed," or "the long gone." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">慎</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">追</span> mean, "to be careful of," "to follow," but their application is as in the translation. <a href="chapter-1-9.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">厚</span>, "thick," in opposition to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">薄</span>, "thin;" metaphorically, = <em>good</em>, <em>excellent</em>. The force of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">歸</span>, "to return," is to show that this virtue is naturally proper to the people. <a href="chapter-1-9.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Characteristics of Confucius, and their influence on the princes of the time.</b> <a href="chapter-1-10.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-chʽin</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzu-kʽang</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">亢</span>) are designations of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">陳亢</span>, one of the minor disciples of Confucius. His tablet occupies the 28th place, on the west, in the outer part of the temples. On the death of his brother, his wife and major-domo wished to bury some living persons with him, to serve him in the regions below. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-chʽin</span> proposed that the wife and steward themselves submit to the immolation, which made them stop the matter. <a href="chapter-1-10.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-kung</span>, with the double surname <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">端木</span> and named <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">賜</span>, occupies a higher place in the Confucian ranks. He is conspicuous in this work for his readiness and smartness in reply and displayed on several occasions practical and political ability. <a href="chapter-1-10.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">夫</span>, "a general designation for males," = man. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">夫子</span>,&#8212;a common designation for a teacher or master. <a href="chapter-1-10.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">是邦</span>, "this country" = <em>any country</em>. <a href="chapter-1-10.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">必</span>, "must," = <em>does not fail to</em>. <a href="chapter-1-10.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The antecedent to both the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> is to the whole clause <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">聞其政</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span>, with no tone marked = "to give to," "with," "to"; <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span>, as in <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-1-10.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The force of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其諸</span> is well enough expressed by the dash in English, the previous <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也</span> indicating a pause in the discourse, which the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其</span>, "it," resumes. See <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Yin-chih's</span> <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Treatise</i>, <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-1-10.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>On filial duty.</b> <a href="chapter-1-11.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">行</span> is, in the 4th tone, explained by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">行跡</span>, "traces of walking," = <em>conduct</em>. It is to be understood that the way of the father had not been very bad. <a href="chapter-1-11.xhtml#noteref-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An old interpretation, that three years are to be understood of the three years of mourning for the father, is now rightly rejected. The meaning should not be confined to that period. <a href="chapter-1-11.xhtml#noteref-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>In ceremonies a natural ease is to be prized, and yet to be subordinate to the end of ceremonies,&#8212;The reverential observance of propriety.</b> <a href="chapter-1-12.xhtml#noteref-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">禮</span> is not easily rendered in another language. There underlies it the idea of <em>what is proper</em>. It is <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">事之宜</span>, "the fitness of things," what reason calls for in the performance of duties towards superior beings, and between man and man. Our term "ceremonies" comes near its meaning here. <a href="chapter-1-12.xhtml#noteref-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道</span> is here a name for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">禮</span>, as indicating the <em>courses</em> or <em>ways</em> to be trodden by men. <a href="chapter-1-12.xhtml#noteref-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">小大由之</span>, the antecedent to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> is not <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">和</span>, but <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">禮</span> or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道</span>. <a href="chapter-1-12.xhtml#noteref-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Observe the force of the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">亦</span>, "also," in the last clause, and how it affirms the general principles enunciated in the first paragraph. <a href="chapter-1-12.xhtml#noteref-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>To save from future repentance, we must be careful in our first steps.</b> <a href="chapter-1-13.xhtml#noteref-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A different view of the scope of this chapter is taken by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</span>. It illustrates, according to him, the difference between being sincere and righteousness, between being respectful and propriety, and how a man's conduct may be venerated. The later view commends itself, the only difficulty being with <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">近於</span>, "near to," which we must accept as a <em>meiosis</em> for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">合乎</span>, "agreeing with." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">信</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">信約</span>, "a covenant," "agreement." <a href="chapter-1-13.xhtml#noteref-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">遠</span>, 4th tone, "to keep away from." <a href="chapter-1-13.xhtml#noteref-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The force of the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">亦</span> =- "he can <em>go on</em> to make them his masters." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">宗</span> being taken as an active verb. <a href="chapter-1-13.xhtml#noteref-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>With what mind one aiming to be a <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chün-tzŭ</i> pursues his learning.</b> <a href="chapter-1-13.xhtml#noteref-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He may be well, even luxuriously, fed and lodged, but, with his higher aim, these things are not his seeking,&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">無求</span>. <a href="chapter-1-14.xhtml#noteref-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A nominative to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">可謂</span> must be supposed,&#8212;<em>all this</em>, or <em>such a person</em>. <a href="chapter-1-14.xhtml#noteref-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The closing particles, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也已</span>, give emphasis to the preceding sentence, = <em>yes, indeed</em>. <a href="chapter-1-14.xhtml#noteref-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>An illustration of the successive steps in self-cultivation.</b> <a href="chapter-1-15.xhtml#noteref-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-kung</span> had been poor, and then did not cringe. He became rich and was not proud. He asked Confucius about the style of character to which he had attained. Confucius allows its worth, but sent him to higher attainments. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而</span>, here, = "and yet." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">何如</span>, "what as?" = "what do you say&#8212;what is to be thought&#8212;of this?" <a href="chapter-1-15.xhtml#noteref-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Observe the force of the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">未</span>, "not yet." <a href="chapter-1-15.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The ode quoted is the first of the songs of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">衞</span>), praising the prince <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>, who had dealt with himself as an ivory-worker who first cuts the bone, and then files it smooth, on a lapidary whose hammer and chisel are followed by all the appliances for smoothing and polishing. See the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> Ode <span epub:type="z3998:roman"><b>i</b></span> <abbr>st.</abbr> 2</cite>. <a href="chapter-1-15.xhtml#noteref-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其斯之謂</span>, the antecedent to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其</span> is the passage of the ode, and that to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">斯</span> is the reply of Confucius. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之謂</span>, see <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Prémare</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 156</cite>. The clause might be translated&#8212;"Is not that passage the saying of this?" Or, "Does not that mean this?" <a href="chapter-1-15.xhtml#noteref-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="it">Intorcetta</span> and his co-adjutors translate here as if <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">賜</span> were in the 2nd <abbr class="eoc">pers.</abbr> But the Chinese <abbr>comm.</abbr> put it in the 3rd, and correctly. <span xml:lang="fr">Prémare</span>, on the character <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也</span>, says, "<i xml:lang="la">Fere semper adjungitur nominibus propriis. Sic in libro</i> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn">Lun Yu</i>, <i xml:lang="la">Confucius loquens de suis discipulis</i>, <i xml:lang="zh-Latn">Yeou, Keou, Hosi,</i> <i xml:lang="la">vel ipsos alloquens, dicit</i> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">由也, 求也, 回也</span>." It is not to be denied that the name before <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也</span> is sometimes in the 2nd <abbr class="eoc">pers.</abbr>, but generally it is in the 3rd, and the force of the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也</span> = <i xml:lang="la">quoad</i>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">賜也</span>, <i xml:lang="la"> quoad</i> <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzʽŭ</i>. <a href="chapter-1-15.xhtml#noteref-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">已矣</span>, nearly = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也已</span>, (or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">已</span> without marking the tone), in <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-1-15.xhtml#noteref-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The last clause may be given&#8212;"Tell him the past, and he knows the future;" but the connection determines the meaning as in the translation. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">諸</span>, as in <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span></cite>, is a particle, a mere <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">語助</span>, as it is called, "a helping or supporting word." <a href="chapter-1-15.xhtml#noteref-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Personal attainment should be our chief aim.</b> <a href="chapter-1-16.xhtml#noteref-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Comp.</abbr> <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 3.</cite> After the negative <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不</span>, as in <cite>chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 1</cite>, observe the transposition in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">己知</span>, which is more elegant than <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">知己</span> would be. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">己</span>, "self," the person depending on the context. <a href="chapter-1-16.xhtml#noteref-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We cannot translate "do not be afflicted," because <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不</span> is not used imperatively, like <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">勿</span>. A nominative to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">患</span> has to be assumed,&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">我</span>, "I," or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">君子</span>, "the superior man." <a href="chapter-1-16.xhtml#noteref-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><strong>Heading of this book.</strong>&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲政第二</span>. This second Book contains twenty-four chapters, and is named <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲政</span>, "The practice of government." That is the object to which learning, treated of in the last Book, should lead, and here we have the qualities which constitute, and the character of the men who administer, government. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The influence of virtue in a ruler.</b> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">德</span> is explained by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">得</span>, and the old commentators say <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">物得以生謂之德</span>, "what creatures get at their birth is called their virtue;" but this is a mere play on the common sound of different words. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> makes it = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">行道而有得於心</span>, "the practice of truth and acquisition thereof in the heart." His view of the comparison is that it sets forth the illimitable influence which virtue in a ruler exercises without his using any effort. This is extravagant. This opponents say that virtue is the polar star, and the various departments of government the other stars. This is far-fetched. We must be content to accept the vague utterance without minutely determining its meaning. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">北辰</span> is, not doubt, "the north polar star," anciently believed to coincide exactly with the place of the real pole. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">共</span> in the 3rd tone used for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">拱</span>, "to fold the hands in saluting," here = "to turn respectfully towards." <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The pure design of the book of poetry.</b> <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The number of compositions in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</i> is rather more than the round number here given. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">一言</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">一句</span>, "one sentence." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">蔽</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">蓋</span>, "to cover," "to embrace." <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">思無邪</span>, see <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 1 <abbr>st.</abbr> 4</cite>. The sentence there is indicative, and in praise of the duke <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsi</span>, who had no depraved thoughts. The sage would seem to have been intending the design in compiling the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih</i>. A few individual pieces are calculated to have a different effect. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How rulers should prefer moral appliances.</b> <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道</span>, as in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span></cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span>, "them," refers to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">民</span>, below. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">政</span>, as opposed to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">德</span>, = laws and prohibitions. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">齊</span> = "corn earing evenly;" hence, what is level, equal, adjusted, and here with the corresponding verbal force. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">民免</span>, "The people will avoid," that is, avoid breaking the laws through fear of the punishment. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">格</span> has the signification of "to come to," and "to correct," from either of which the text may be explained,&#8212;"will come to good," or "will correct themselves." Observe the different application of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">且</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而</span> in <cite><abbr>pars.</abbr> 1 and 2</cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而</span> = "but;", <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">且</span> = "moreover." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><strong>Confucius's own account of his gradual progress and attainments.</strong> Commentators are perplexed with this chapter. Holding of Confucius that <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">生而知之, 安而行之</span>, "he was born with knowledge, and did what was right with entire ease," they say that he here conceals his sagehood, and puts himself on the level of common men, to set before them a stimulating example. We may believe that the compilers of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>, the sage's immediate disciples, did not think of him so extravagantly as later men have done. It is to be wished, however, that he had been more definite and diffuse in his account of himself. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">有</span>, in 4th tone, = "and." The "learning," to which, at 15, Confucius gave himself is to be understood of the subjects of the "Superior Learning." See <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi's</span> preliminary essay to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ta Hsüeh</i>. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "standing firm" probably indicates that he no more needed to bend his will. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "no doubts" may have been concerning what was proper in all circumstances and events. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"The degrees of Heaven," = the things degreed by Heaven, the constitution of things making what was proper to be so. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"The ear obedient" is the mind receiving as by intuition the truth from the ear. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">矩</span>, "an instrument for determining the square." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不踰矩</span>, "without transgressing the square." The expression describing the progress of Confucius at the different periods of his age are often employed as numerical designations of age. <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Filial piety must be shown according to the rule of propriety.</b> <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng Yi</span> was a great officer of the Sate of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, by name <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-chi</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">何忌</span>), and the chief of one of the three great families by which in the time of Confucius the authority of that State was grasped. Those families were descended from three brothers, the sons by a concubine of the duke <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huan</span> (<abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 711&#8211;694), who were distinguished at first by the prenomens of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仲, 叔</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">季</span>. To these was subsequently added the character <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孫</span>, "grandson," to indicate their princely descent, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仲孫, 叔孫</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">季孫</span> became the respective surnames of the families. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仲孫</span> was changed into <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孟孫</span> by the father of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng Yi</span>, on a principle of humility, as he thereby only claimed to be eldest of the inferior sons of their representatives, and avoided the presumption of seeming to be a younger full brother of the reigning duke. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">懿</span>, "mild and virtuous," was the posthumous honorary title given to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-chi</span>. On <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 1</cite>. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fan</span>, by name <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">須</span>, and designated <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子遲</span>, was a minor disciple of the sage. Confucius repeated his remark to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fan</span>, that he might report the explanation of it to his friend <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng Yi</span>, or <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng-sun Yi</span>, and thus prevent him from supposing that all the sage intended was disobedience to parents. <abbr>Comp.</abbr> the whole of Confucius's explanation with <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The anxiety of parents about their children an argument for filial piety.</b> <a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This enigmatical sentence has been interpreted in two ways. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> takes <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">唯</span> (= <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">惟</span>) not in the sense of "only," but of "thinking anxiously."&#8212;"Parents have the sorrow of thinking anxiously about their&#8212;<abbr>i.e.</abbr> their children's&#8212;being unwell. Therefore children should take care of their persons." The old commentators again take <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">唯</span> in the sense of "only."&#8212;"Let parents have only the sorrow of their children's illness. Let them have no other occasion for sorrow. This will be filial piety." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng Wu</span> (the honorary epithet, = "Bold and of straightforward principle") was the son of Mang I, and by name <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">彘</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chih</span>). <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">伯</span> merely indicates that he was the eldest son. <a href="chapter-2-7.xhtml#noteref-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How there must be reverence in filial duty.</b> <a href="chapter-2-7.xhtml#noteref-118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-yu</span> was the designation of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">言偃</span>, a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">吳</span>, and distinguished among the disciples of Confucius for his learning. He is now 4th on the west among "the wise ones." <a href="chapter-2-7.xhtml#noteref-119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">養</span> is in the 4th tone, = "to minister support to," the act of an inferior to a superior. <a href="chapter-2.7.xhtml#noteref-120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> gives a different turn to the sentiment.&#8212;"But dogs and horses likewise manage to get their support." The other and older interpretation is better. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">至於</span>, "coming to," = as to, <i xml:lang="la">quoad</i>. <a href="chapter-2.7.xhtml#noteref-121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">別</span> = "to discriminate," "distinguish." <a href="chapter-2.7.xhtml#noteref-122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The duties of filial piety must be performed with a cheerful countenance.</b> <a href="chapter-2-8.xhtml#noteref-123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">事</span> followed by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">勞</span> = the "<em>troublesome affairs</em>" in the translation. The use of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">弟子</span> in the phrase here extends filial duty to elders generally,&#8212;to the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">父兄</span> as well as to the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">父母</span>. We have in translating to supply their respective nominatives to the two <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">有</span>. <a href="chapter-2-8.xhtml#noteref-124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">食</span> read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ssŭ</i>, "rice," and then, food generally. <a href="chapter-2-8.xhtml#noteref-125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">先生饌</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與先生饌之</span>, "They give them to their elders to eat." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">先生</span> = elders. The phrase, here meaning parents, uncles, and elders generally, is applied by foreign students to their teachers. <a href="chapter-2-8.xhtml#noteref-126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">曾</span>, aspirated, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">則</span>, "then," a transition particle. To these different interrogatories, the sage, we are told, made answer according to the character of the questioner, as each one needed instruction. <a href="chapter-2-8.xhtml#noteref-127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The quiet receptivity of the disciple <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-2-9.xhtml#noteref-128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Hui</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顔回</span>), styled <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子淵</span>, was Confucius's favourite disciple, and is now honoured with the first place east among his four assessors in his temples, and with the title of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">復聖顔子</span>, "The second sage, the philosopher <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen</span>." At 29 his hair was entirely white, and at 33 he died, to the excessive grief of the sage. <a href="chapter-2-9.xhtml#noteref-129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The subject of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">退</span> is <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">回</span>, and that of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">省</span> (as in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span></cite>) is <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">吾</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其私</span>, "his privacy," meaning only his way when note with the master. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">亦</span>, "also," takes up <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">如愚</span>,&#8212;He was so, and also thus. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">回也</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> 3</cite>. <a href="chapter-2-9.xhtml#noteref-130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How to determine the characters of men.</b> <a href="chapter-2-10.xhtml#noteref-131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">以</span> is explained as = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">行</span>, or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">行用</span>, "does." The same, though not its common meaning, is the first given to it in the <abbr class="eoc">dict.</abbr> For the noun to which the three <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其</span> refer, we must go down to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">人</span> in the 4th <abbr class="eoc">par.</abbr> <a href="chapter-2-10.xhtml#noteref-132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is a climax in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">所以</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">所由</span> ("what from"), and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">所安</span>, and a corresponding one in the verbs <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">視</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">觀</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">察</span>. <a href="chapter-2-10.xhtml#noteref-133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">焉</span>, generally a final particle, in 2nd tone, is here in the 1st, an interrogative, = how? Its interrogative force blends with the exclamatory of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">哉</span> at the end. <a href="chapter-2-10.xhtml#noteref-134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>To be able to teach others one must from his old stores be continually developing things new.</b> <a href="chapter-2-11.xhtml#noteref-135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">温</span> is expressed in the dictionary by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">燖</span>, and, with reference to this very passage, it is said, "one's old learning being thoroughly mastered, again constantly to practise it, is called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">溫</span>." Modern commentators say that the "new learning is in the old." The idea probably is that of assimilating old acquisitions and new. Compare <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">中庸</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-2-11.xhtml#noteref-136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The general aptitude of the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chün-tzŭ</i>.</b> <a href="chapter-2-12.xhtml#noteref-137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is not like our English saying, that "such a man is a machine,"&#8212;a blind instrument. A utensil has its particular use. It answers for that and no other. Not so with the superior man, who is <i xml:lang="la">ad omnia paratus</i>. <a href="chapter-2-12.xhtml#noteref-138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How with the superior man words follow actions.</b> <a href="chapter-2-13.xhtml#noteref-139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reply is literally&#8212;"He first acts his words and afterwards follows them." A translator's difficulty is with the latter clause. What is the antecedent to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span>? It would seem to be <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其言</span>, but in that case there is no room for words at all. Nor is there according to the old commentators. In the interpretation I have given, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> foollows the famous <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou Lien-hsi</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">周濂溪</span>). <a href="chapter-2-13.xhtml#noteref-140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The difference between the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chün-tzŭ</i> and the small man.</b> <a href="chapter-2-14.xhtml#noteref-141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">比</span>, here in 4th tone, = "partial," "partizanly." The sentiment is this:&#8212;"With the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chün-tzu</i>, it is in principles not men; with the small man, the reverse." <a href="chapter-2-14.xhtml#noteref-142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>In learning, reading and thought must be combined.</b> <a href="chapter-2-15.xhtml#noteref-143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">罔</span>, "a net," used also in the sense of "not," as an adverb, and here as an adjective. The old commentators make <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">殆</span>, "perilous," simply = "wearisome to the body." <a href="chapter-2-15.xhtml#noteref-144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Strange doctrines are not to be studied.</b> <a href="chapter-2-16.xhtml#noteref-145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">攻</span>, often "to attack," as an enemy, here = "to apply one's self to," "to study." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">端</span>, "correct;" then, "beginnings," "first principles;" here = "doctrines." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也已</span>, as in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span></cite>. In Confucius's time Buddhism was not in China, and we can hardly suppose him to intend Taoism. Indeed, we are ignorant to what doctrines he referred, but his maxim is of general application. <a href="chapter-2-16.xhtml#noteref-146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>There should be no pretence in the profession of knowledge, or the denial of ignorance.</b> <a href="chapter-2-17.xhtml#noteref-147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">由</span>, by surname <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仲</span>, and generally known by his designation of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-lu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子路</span>), was one of the most famous disciples of Confucius, and now occupies in the temples the 4th place east in the sage's own hall. He was noted for his courage and forwardness, a man of impulse rather than reflection. Confucius foretold that he would come to an untimely end. He was killed through his own rashness in a revolution in the State of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>. The tassel of his cap being cut off when he received his death-wound, he quoted a saying&#8212;"The superior man must not die without his cap," tied on the tassel, adjusted the cap, and expired. This action&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">結纓禮全</span>&#8212;is much lauded. <a href="chapter-2-17.xhtml#noteref-148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Of the six <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">知</span>, the 1st and 6th are knowledge subjective, the other four are knowledge objective. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">以爲</span>, "to take to be," 'to consider," "to allow." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">女</span>, thus marked with a tone, is used for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">汝</span>, "you." <a href="chapter-2-17.xhtml#noteref-149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The end in learning should be one's own improvement, and not emolument. <a href="chapter-2-18.xhtml#noteref-150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-chang</span>, named <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">師</span>, with the double surname <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顓孫</span>, a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽen</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">陳</span>), was not undistinguished in the Confucian school. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-kung</span> praised him as a man of merit without boasting, humble in a high position, and not arrogant to the helpless. From this chapter, however, it would appear that inferior motives sometimes ruled him. <a href="chapter-2-18.xhtml#noteref-151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">學</span> = "was learning," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> at some particular time. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">干</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">求</span>, "to seek for." <a href="chapter-2-18.xhtml#noteref-152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">闕</span> is explained by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">姑舍置</span>, but this meaning of it is not given clearly in the dictionary. Compare its use in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 4</cite>. <a href="chapter-2-18.xhtml#noteref-153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">祿在其中</span>, "Emolument is herein," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> it will come without seeking; the individual is on the way to it. The lesson is that we are to do what is right, and not be anxious about temporal concerns. <a href="chapter-2-18.xhtml#noteref-154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How a prince by the right employment of his offices may secure the real submission of his subjects.</b> <a href="chapter-2-19.xhtml#noteref-155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ai</span> was the honorary epithet of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">蔣</span>, duke of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> (<abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 494&#8211;468);&#8212;Confucius died in his 16th year. According to the laws of posthumous titles, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">哀</span> denotes "the respectful and benevolent, early cut off." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">哀公</span> = "The to-be-lamented duke." <a href="chapter-2-19.xhtml#noteref-156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">錯</span>, 4th tone, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">置</span>, "to set aside." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">諸</span> is partly euphonious, but also indicates the plural. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孔子對曰</span>, "The philosopher <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung</span> replied." Here, for the first time, the sage is called by his surname, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">對</span> is used, as indicating the reply of an inferior to a superior. <a href="chapter-2-19.xhtml#noteref-157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Example in superiors is more powerful than force.</b> <a href="chapter-2-20.xhtml#noteref-158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang</span>, "easy and pleasant, people-soother," was the honorary epithet of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi-sun Fei</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">肥</span>), the head of one of the three great families of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>; see <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span></cite>. His idea is seen in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">使</span>, "to cause," the power of force; that of Confucius appears in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">則</span>, "then," the power of influence. <a href="chapter-2-20.xhtml#noteref-159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">以勸</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">以</span> is said to = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span>, "together with," "mutually." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">勸</span>, "to advise," "to teach," has also in the dictionary the meaning&#8212;"to rejoice to follow," which is its force here, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲善</span>, "the practice of goodness," being understood. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Yin-chih</span> (on the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Particles</i>) says that in this (and similar passages) <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">以</span> unites the meaning of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而</span>; and this is the view which I have myself long held. <a href="chapter-2-20.xhtml#noteref-160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius's explanation of his not being in any office.</b> <a href="chapter-2-21.xhtml#noteref-161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">或謂孔子</span>,&#8212;the surname indicates that the questioner was not a disciple. <a href="chapter-2-21.xhtml#noteref-162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Confucius had his reason for not being in office at the time, but it was not expedient to tell it. He replied there as in <cite><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</cite>. <a href="chapter-2-21.xhtml#noteref-163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-ching</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span> 1</cite>. But the text is neither correctly applied nor exactly quoted. The old interpreters read in one sentence <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孝乎惟孝</span>, "O filial piety! nothing but filial piety!" <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>, however, pauses at <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">乎</span>, and commences the quotation with <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">惟孝</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">奚其爲爲政</span>, the 1st <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">以爲</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其</span> refers to the thought in the question, that <em>office</em> was necessary to one's being in government. <a href="chapter-2-21.xhtml#noteref-164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The necessity to a man of being truthful and sincere.</b> <a href="chapter-2-22.xhtml#noteref-165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">輗</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">軏</span> are explained in the dictionary in the same way&#8212;"the crossbar at the end of the carriage-pole." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> says, "In the light carriage the end of the pole curved upwards, and the cross-bar was suspended from a hook." This would give it more elasticity. <a href="chapter-2-22.xhtml#noteref-166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The great principles governing society are unchangeable.</b> <a href="chapter-2-23.xhtml#noteref-167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">世</span> may be taken as an age = our "century," or as a generation = thirty years, which is its radical meaning being formed from <em>three tens</em> and <em>one</em> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">卅</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">一</span>.) Confucius made no pretension to supernatural powers and all commentators are agreed that the things here asked about were not what we call contingent or indifferent events. He merely says that the great principles of morality and relations of society had continued the same and would ever do so. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">乎</span>. <a href="chapter-2-23.xhtml#noteref-168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsia</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yin</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> are now spoken of as the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">三代</span>, "The three changes," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> the three great dynasties. The first sovereign of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsia</span> was "The great <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yü</span>," <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 2205; of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yin</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span>, <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 1766; and of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>, <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 1122. <a href="chapter-2-23.xhtml#noteref-169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Neither in sacrifice nor in any other practice may a man do anything but what is right.</b> <a href="chapter-2-24.xhtml#noteref-170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">人神曰鬼</span>, "The spirit of man (<abbr>i.e.</abbr> of the dead) is called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鬼</span>. The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鬼</span> of which a man may say that they are his, are those only of his ancestors, and to them only he may sacrifice. The ritual of China provides for sacrifices to three classes of objects&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">天神</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">地祇</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">人鬼</span>, "spirits of heaven, of the earth, of men." This chapter is not to be extended to all the three. It has reference only to the manes of departed men. <a href="chapter-2-24.xhtml#noteref-171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><strong>Heading of this book.</strong>&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">八佾第三</span>. The last Book treated of the practice of government, and therein no things, according to Chinese ideas, are more important than ceremonial rites and music. With those topics, therefore, the twenty-six chapters of this Book are occupied, and "eight rows," the principle words in the first chapter, are adopted as its heading. <a href="chapter-3-1.xhtml#noteref-172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius's indignation at the usurpation of royal rights.</b> <a href="chapter-3-1.xhtml#noteref-173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">季氏</span>, by contraction for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">季孫氏</span>; see on <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span></cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">氏</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">姓</span> are now used without distinction, meaning "surname," only that the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">氏</span> of a woman is always spoken of , and not her <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">姓</span>. Originally the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">氏</span> appears to have been used to denote the branch families of one surname. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">季氏</span>, "The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi</span> family," with special reference to its head, "<em>The</em> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi</span>," as we should say. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">謂</span> is used here, as frequently, in the sense&#8212;"to speak of." <a href="chapter-3-1.xhtml#noteref-174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">佾</span>, "a row of dancers," or pantomimes rather, who kept time in the temple services, in the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">庭</span>, the front space before the raised portion in the principal hall, moving or brandishing feathers, flags, or other articles. In his ancestral temple, the king had eight rows, each row consisting of eight men, a duke or prince had six, and a great officer only four. For the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi</span>, therefore, to use eight rows was a usurpation, for though it may be argued, that to the ducal family of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> royal rites were conceded, and that the offshoots of it (<cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span></cite>) might use the same, still great officers were confined to the ordinances proper to their rank. <a href="chapter-3-1.xhtml#noteref-175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Confucius's remark may also be translated, "If this be endured, what may not be endured?" For there is force in the observations of the author of the <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書翼註</span></cite>, that this <abbr>par.</abbr> and the following must be assigned to the sage during the short time that he held high office in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. <a href="chapter-3-1.xhtml#noteref-176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Again against usurped rights.</b> <a href="chapter-3-2.xhtml#noteref-177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">三家者</span>. "<em>Those</em> belonging to the three families." They assembled together, as being the descendants of duke <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huan</span> (<cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span></cite>), in one temple. To this belonged the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">庭</span> in the last chapter, which is called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">季氏庭</span>, circumstances having concurred to make the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi</span> the chief of the three families; see <cite><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書改錯</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span></cite>. For the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yung</span> ode, see <cite><i epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>sec.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> Ode <span epub:type="z3998:roman"><b>vii</b></span>.</cite> It was, properly, sung in the royal temples of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> dynasty, at the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">徹</span>, "the clearing away," of the sacrificial apparatus, and contains the lines quoted by Confucius, quite inappropriate to the circumstances of the three families. <a href="chapter-3-2.xhtml#noteref-178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">辟</span>,&#8212;without an aspirate. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">相</span>,&#8212;4th tone, "assistant," "assisting." <a href="chapter-3-2.xhtml#noteref-179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Ceremonies and music vain without virtue.</b> <a href="chapter-3-3.xhtml#noteref-180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仁</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span></cite>. I don't know how to render it here, otherwise than in the translation. Commentators define it&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">心之全德</span>, "the entire virtue of the heart." As referred to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">禮</span>, it indicates the feeling of reverence; as referred to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">樂</span> (<i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">yüeh</i>), it indicates harmoniousness. <a href="chapter-3-3.xhtml#noteref-181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The object of ceremonies should regulate them:&#8212;Against formalism.</b> <a href="chapter-3-4.xhtml#noteref-182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lin Fang</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子邱</span>, was a man of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, whose tablet is now placed first, on the west, in the outer court of the temples. He is known only by the question in this chapter. According to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">本</span> here is not <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">根本</span>, "the radical idea," "the essence;" but = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">初</span>, "the beginning" (opposed to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">末</span>), "the first thing to be attended to."  <a href="chapter-3-4.xhtml#noteref-183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">禮</span>, as opposed to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">喪</span> (1st tone), must indicate the festive or fortunate (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">吉</span>) ceremonies,&#8212;capping, marriage, and sacrifices. <a href="chapter-3-4.xhtml#noteref-184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">易</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">yi</i>, 4th tone. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> explains it by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">治</span>, as in Mencius&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">易其田疇</span>, "to cleanse and dress the fields," and interprets as in the translation. The old commentators take the meaning&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">和易</span>, "harmony and ease," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> not being overmuch troubled. <a href="chapter-3-4.xhtml#noteref-185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The anarchy of Confucius's time.</b> <a href="chapter-3-5.xhtml#noteref-186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">夷</span> were the barbarous tribes on the east of China, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">狄</span>, those on the north. See <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">禮記, 王制</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span></cite>. The two are here used for the barbarous tribes about China generally. <a href="chapter-3-5.xhtml#noteref-187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">諸夏</span> is a name for China because of the <em>multitude</em> of its regions (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">諸</span>), and its <em>greatness</em> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">夏</span>). <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">華夏</span>, "The Flowery and Great," is still a common designation of it. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">	Chu Hsi</span> takes <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">如</span> as simply = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">似</span>, and hence the sentiment in the translation. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen's</span> commentary is to this effect:&#8212;"The rude tribes with their prices are still not equal to China with its anarchy." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">亡</span>, read as, and = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">無</span>. <a href="chapter-3-5.xhtml#noteref-188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>On the folly of usurped sacrifices.</b> <a href="chapter-3-6.xhtml#noteref-189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">旅</span> is said to be the name appropriate to sacrifices to mountains, but we find it applied also to sacrifices to God. The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai</span> mountain is the first of the "five mountains" (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">五嶽</span>), which are celebrated in Chinese literature, and have always received religious honours. It was in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, or rather on the borders between <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>, about two miles north of the present department city of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai-an</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">泰安</span>), in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shan-tung</span>. According to the ritual of China, sacrifice could only be offered to those mountains by the sovereign, and by the princes in whose States any of them happened to be. For the chief of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi</span> family, therefore, to sacrifice to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai</span> mountain was a great usurpation. <a href="chapter-3-6.xhtml#noteref-190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">女</span> as in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span></cite> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">汝</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">曾</span> as in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span></cite> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">則</span>, or we may take it as = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">經</span>, "Have you said," <abbr>etc.</abbr>? <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">泰山</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">泰山之神</span>, "The spirit of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai</span> mountain." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lin Fang</span>,&#8212;see <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span></cite> from which the reason of this reference to him may be understood. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan Yu</span>, named (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">求</span>), and by designation <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子有</span>, was one of the disciples of Confucius, and is now third, in the hall, on the west. He entered the service of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi</span> family, and was a man of ability and resource. <a href="chapter-3-6.xhtml#noteref-191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The superior man avoids all contentious striving.</b> <a href="chapter-3-7.xhtml#noteref-192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">君子</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">尚德之人</span>, "the man who prefers virtue." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">必也射乎</span>, literally, "if he must, shall it be in archery?" <a href="chapter-3-7.xhtml#noteref-193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">揖譲</span>, according to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>, extend over all the verbs, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">升</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">下</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">飲</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">下</span> is marked in the 4th tone, anciently appropriate to it as a verb. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">飲</span>, 4th tone, "to give to drink," here = to exact from the vanquished the forfeit cup. In Confucius's time there were three principal exercises of archery:&#8212;the great archery, under the eye of the sovereign; the guests' archery, which might be at the royal court or at the visits of the princes among themselves; and the festive archery, for amusement. The regulations for the archers were substantially the same in them all, and served to prove their virtue, instead of giving occasion to quarrelling. There is no end to the controversies among commentators on minor points. <a href="chapter-3-7.xhtml#noteref-194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Ceremonies are secondary and merely ornamental.</b> <a href="chapter-3-8.xhtml#noteref-195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The sentences quoted by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-hsia</span> are, it is supposed, from a <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">逸詩</span>, one of the poems which Confucius did not admit into the <i epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</i>. The two first lines, however, are found in it, <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span></cite>; <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span></cite>. The disciple's inquiry turns on the meaning of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">以爲</span> in the last line, which he took to mean&#8212;"The plain ground is to be regarded as the colouring." <a href="chapter-3-8.xhtml#noteref-196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Confucius, in his reply, makes <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">後</span> a verb, governing <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">素</span>, = "comes after the plain ground." <a href="chapter-3-8.xhtml#noteref-197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">禮後乎</span>;&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-hsia's</span> remark is an exclamation rather than a question. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">起予者</span>, "He who stirs me up," = "He who brings out my meaning." On the last sentence, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span></cite>.&#8212;The above interpretation, especially as to the meaning of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">繪事後素</span>, after <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>, is quite the opposite of that of the old interpreters. Their view is of course strongly supported by the author of <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書改錯</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-3-8.xhtml#noteref-198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The decay of the monuments of antiquity.</b> <a href="chapter-3-9.xhtml#noteref-199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsia</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yin</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span></cite>. In the small state of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> (originally what is now the district of the same name in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽai-feng</span> department in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-nan</span>. But the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">文</span>, "literary monuments" of those countries, and their <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">獻</span> (= <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">賢</span>, so in the <cite><i epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-ching</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 5, et <abbr>al.</abbr></cite>), "wise men," had become few. Had Confucius therefore delivered all his knowledge about the two dynasties, he would have exposed his truthfulness to suspicion. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">徵</span>, in the sense of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">證</span>, "to witness," and, at the end, "to appeal to for evidence." The old commentators, however, interpret the whole differently.&#8212;Already in the time of Confucius many of the records of antiquity had perished. <a href="chapter-3-9.xhtml#noteref-200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The sage's dissatisfaction at the want of propriety in ceremonies.</b> <a href="chapter-3-10.xhtml#noteref-201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">褅</span> is the name belonging to different sacrifices, but here indicates the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">大祭</span>, "great sacrifice," which could properly be celebrated only by the sovereign. The individual sacrificed to in it was the remotest ancestor from whom the founder of the reigning dynasty traced his descent. As to who were his assessors in the sacrifice and how often it was offered;&#8212;these are disputed points. See <cite><i epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-hsi's <abbr>dict.</abbr></i>, <abbr>char.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">褅</span></cite>. Compare also <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書改錯</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span></cite>, and <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書拓餘説</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span></cite>. A royal rite, its use in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> was wrong (see next <abbr>chap.</abbr>), but there was something in the service after the early act of libation inviting the descent of the spirits, which more particularly moved the anger of Confucius. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">以往</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">以後</span>, different from <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">往</span> in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-3-10.xhtml#noteref-202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The profound meaning of the great sacrifice.</b> <a href="chapter-3-11.xhtml#noteref-203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This chapter is akin to <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span></cite>. Confucius evades replying to his questioner, it being contrary to Chinese propriety to speak in a country of the faults of its government or rulers. <a href="chapter-3-11.xhtml#noteref-204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">說</span>, "explanation," = <em>meaning</em>. The antecedent to the second <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其</span> is the whole of the preceding clause:&#8212;"The relation to the kingdom of him who knew its meaning;&#8212;<em>that</em> would be as to look on this." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">乎</span>, interjective, more than interrogative. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">示</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">視</span>, "to see." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">天下</span>, "under heaven," an ambitious designation for the Chinese empire, as <i xml:lang="grc">ἡ οἰκουμένη</i> and <i xml:lang="la">orbis terrae</i> were used by the Greek and Romans. <a href="chapter-3-11.xhtml#noteref-205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius's own sincerity in sacrificing.</b> <a href="chapter-3-12.xhtml#noteref-206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">祭</span> here is historical and not to be translated in the imperative. We have to supply an objective to the first <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">祭</span>, <abbr>viz.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">先祖</span>, <em>the dead</em>, his forefathers, as contrasted with <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">神</span> in the next clause, = all the "spirits" to which in his official capacity he would have to sacrifice. <a href="chapter-3-12.xhtml#noteref-207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Observe <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span> in the 4th tone, "to be present at," "to take part in." <a href="chapter-3-12.xhtml#noteref-208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>That there is no resource against the consequences of violating the right.</b> <a href="chapter-3-13.xhtml#noteref-209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chia</span> was a great officer of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">衞</span>), and having the power of the State in his hands insinuated to Confucius that it would be for his advantage to pay court to him. <a href="chapter-3-13.xhtml#noteref-210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">奧</span>, or south-west corner, was from the structure of ancient houses the cosiest nook, and the place of honour. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> explains the proverb by reference to the customs of sacrifice. The furnace was comparatively a mean place, but when the spirit of the furnace was sacrificed to, then the rank of the two places was changed for the time, and the proverb quoted was in vogue. But there does not seem much force in this explanation. The <em>door</em>, or <em>well</em>, or any other of the five things in the regular sacrifices, might take the place of the <em>furnace</em>. The old explanation which makes no reference to sacrifice is simpler. <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ao</i> might be the more retired and honourable place, but the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">tsao</i> was the more important for the support and comfort of the household. The prince and his immediate attendants might be more honourable than such a minister as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chia</span>, but more benefit might be got from him. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">媚</span>, from <em>woman</em> and <em>eyebrows</em>, = "to ogle," "to flatter." <a href="chapter-3-13.xhtml#noteref-211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Confucius's reply was a high tone. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> says, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">天即理也</span>, "Heaven means principle." But why should Heaven mean principle, if there were not in such a use of the term an instinctive recognition of a supreme government of intelligence and righteousness? We find <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">天</span> explained in the <span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書拓餘説</span> by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">高高在上者</span>, "The lofty One who is on high." A scholar of great ability and research has written to me contending that we ought to find in this chapter a reference to fire-worship as having been by the time of Confucius introduced from Persia into China; but I have not found sufficient reference to such a introduction at so early a period. The ordinary explanation seems to me more satisfactory;&#8212;simple and sufficient. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</span> quotes the words of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung An-kuo</span> of our second century on the passage:&#8212;"<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chia</span> held in his hands the government of the State. Wishing to make Confucius pay court to him, he stirred him up in a gentle way by quoting to him a saying common among the people." <a href="chapter-3-13.xhtml#noteref-212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The completeness and elegance of the institutions of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> Dynasty.</b> <a href="chapter-3-14.xhtml#noteref-213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>By the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">周</span> we are specially to understand the founders of the power and polity of the dynasty&#8212;the king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>, and the duke of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>. The two past dynasties are the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsia</span> and the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shang</span> or <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yin</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">文</span> = "elegant regulations." <a href="chapter-3-14.xhtml#noteref-214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius and the grand temple.</b> <a href="chapter-3-15.xhtml#noteref-215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">大</span> (= <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">太</span>) <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">廟</span> was the temple dedicated to the duke of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">周公</span>, and where he was sacrificed to with royal rites. The thing is supposed to have taken placed at the beginning of Confucius's official service in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, when he went into the temple with other officers to assist at the sacrifice. He had studied all about ceremonies, but he thought it a mark of sincerity and earnestness to make minute inquiries about them on the occasion spoken of. <a href="chapter-3-16.xhtml#noteref-216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鄹</span> was the name of the town of which Confucius's father had been governor, who was known therefore as "the man of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsou</span>." Confucius would be styled as in the text, only in his early life, or by very ordinary people. <a href="chapter-3-15.xhtml#noteref-217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How the ancients made archery a discipline of virtue.</b> <a href="chapter-3-16.xhtml#noteref-218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We are not to understand <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">射不主皮</span> of all archery among the ancients. The characters are found in the <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">儀禮, 鄉射</span>, <abbr>par.</abbr> 315</cite> of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Shu</span> edition. In the edition of the present dynasty, <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>par.</abbr> 81</cite>. There were trials of archery where the strength was tested. Probably Confucius was speaking of some archery of his times, when the strength which could go through the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">皮</span>, "skin," or leather, in the middle of the target, was esteemed more than the skill which could hit it. <a href="chapter-3-16.xhtml#noteref-219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How Confucius cleaved to ancient rites.</b> <a href="chapter-3-17.xhtml#noteref-220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The king in the last month of the year gave out to the princes a calendar for the first days of the months of the year ensuing. This was kept in their ancestral temples, and on the 1st of every month they offered a sheep and announced the day, requesting sanction for the duties of the month. This idea of requesting sanction is indicated by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">告</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">kao</i>. The dukes of Lu now neglected their part of this ceremony, but the sheep was still offered:&#8212;a meaningless formality, it seemed to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-kung</span>. Confucius, however, thought that while any part of the ceremony was retained, there was a better chance of restoring the whole. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">去</span>, in the 3rd tone, an active verb, "to put away." It is disputed whether <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">餼</span>, in the text, means a <em>living</em> sheep, or a sheep killed but not roasted.  <a href="chapter-3-17.xhtml#noteref-221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">愛</span>, in the sense of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">愛惜</span>, "to grudge," it is said. But this is hardly necessary. <a href="chapter-3-17.xhtml#noteref-222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How princes should be served:&#8212;Against the spirit of the times.</b> <a href="chapter-3-18.xhtml#noteref-223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The guiding principles in the relation of prince and minister.</b> <a href="chapter-3-19.xhtml#noteref-224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">定</span>, "Greatly anxious, tranquillizer of the people," was the posthumous epithet of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">宋</span>, prince of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 509&#8211;495. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">如之何</span>, "As it what?" <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> referring to the two pointed inquired about. <a href="chapter-3-19.xhtml#noteref-225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The praise of the first of the odes.</b> <a href="chapter-3-20.xhtml#noteref-226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">關雎</span> is the name of the first ode in the <i epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</i>, and may be translated&#8212;"The murmuring of the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chü</i>." See <cite><i epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman"><b>i</b></span></cite>. <a href="chapter-3-20.xhtml#noteref-227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>A rash reply of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsai Wo</span> about the altars to the spirits of the land, and lament of Confucius thereon.</b> <a href="chapter-3-21.xhtml#noteref-228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">哀公</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span></cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsai Wo</span>, by name <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">予</span>, and styled <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子我</span>, was an eloquent disciple of the sage, a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. His place is the second west among "the wise ones." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">社</span>, from <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">示</span> (<i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</i>), "spirit or spirits of the earth," and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">土</span>, "the soil," means <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">土地神主</span>, "the resting-place or altars of the spirits of the land or ground." <a href="chapter-3-21.xhtml#noteref-229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wo</span> simply tells the duke that the founders of the several dynasties planted such and such trees about those altars. The reason was that the soil suited such tress; but as <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">栗</span>, "the chestnut tree," the tree of the existing dynasty, is used in the sense of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">慄</span>, "to be afraid," he suggested a reason for its planting which might lead the duke to severe measures against his people to be carried into effect at the altars. <abbr>Comp.</abbr> the <cite><i epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-ching</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 5</cite>, "I will put you to death before the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">社</span>." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">夏后氏</span> is the Great <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yü</span>, called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">后</span>, to distinguish him from his predecessors, the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">帝</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">夏氏</span>, to distinguish him from <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">舜</span>, who was <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">虞氏</span>, while they were descended from the same ancestor. See <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span></cite>, on <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">氏</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">殷人</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">周人</span>, in parallelism with <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">夏后氏</span>, must mean the founders of these dynasties; why they are simply styled <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">人</span>, "man," or "men," I have not found clearly explained, though commentators feel it necessary to say something on the point. <a href="chapter-3-21.xhtml#noteref-230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is all directed against <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wo's</span> reply. He had spoken, and his words could not be recalled. <a href="chapter-3-21.xhtml#noteref-231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius's opinion of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kuan Chung</span>:&#8212;Against him.</b> <a href="chapter-3-22.xhtml#noteref-232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kuan Chung</span>z, by name <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">夷吾</span>, is one of the most famous names in Chinese history. He was chief minister to the duke <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">桓</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">齊</span> (<abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 683&#8211;642), the first and greatest of the five <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">pa</i> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">伯</span> or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">霸</span>), leaders of the princes of the nation under the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> dynasty. In the times of Confucius and Mencius, people thought more of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kuan</span> than those sages, no hero-worshippers, would allow. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">器</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span></cite>, but its significance here is difference, and = our <em>measures</em> or <em>capacity</em>. <a href="chapter-3-22.xhtml#noteref-233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">三歸</span>, in the dictionary, and the commentary of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>, was the name of an extravagant tower built by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kuan</span>. There are other views of the phrase, the oldest and the best supported apparently being that it means, "three wives." (A woman's marriage is called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">歸</span>.) The <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">San Kuei</i> and having no pluralists among his officers proved that he could not be parsimonious. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">焉</span>, the 1st tone, "how." <a href="chapter-3-22.xhtml#noteref-234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">樹</span>, "a tree," here in the sense of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">屏</span>, "a screen," the screen of a prince, usurped by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kuan</span>, who was only entitled to the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">簾</span> of a great officer. <a href="chapter-3-23.xhtml#noteref-235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">好</span>, the 4th tone, = "a friendly meeting." The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">坫</span>, from <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">土</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">占</span>, was a stand, made originally of earth and turf. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kuan</span> usurped the use of it, as he did of the screen; being as regardless of prescribed forms, as in <cite><abbr>par.</abbr> 2</cite> of expense, and he came far short therefore of the Confucian idea of the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chün-tzŭ</i>. <a href="chapter-3-23.xhtml#noteref-236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>On the playing of music.</b> <a href="chapter-3-23.xhtml#noteref-237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">語</span>, the 4th tone, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">告</span>, "to tell," "to instruct." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">大</span> (= <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">太</span>) <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">師樂</span> was the title of the Grand music-master. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">樂其可知也</span>, "music, it may be known," but the subject is not of the principles, but the performance of music. Observe the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">如</span>. <span xml:lang="fr">Prémare</span> says, "<i xml:lang="la">adjectivis addita sensum auget et exprimit modum</i>." It is our <em>ly</em> or <em>like</em>,&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">翕如</span>, "blended like." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">從</span>, the 4th tone, the same as <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">縱</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">放</span>, "let go," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> proceeding, swelling on. <a href="chapter-3-23.xhtml#noteref-238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>A stranger's view of the vocation of Confucius.</b> <a href="chapter-3-24.xhtml#noteref-239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi</span> was a small town on the borders of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, referred to a place in the present department of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽai-feng</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho-nan</span> province. <a href="chapter-3-24.xhtml#noteref-240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Confucius at the beginning of his wanderings after leaving <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> was retiring from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, the prince of which could not employ him. This was the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">喪</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">失位</span>. The 1st and 3rd <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">見</span> are read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">hsien</i>, 4th tone, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">通使得見</span>, "to introduce," or "to be introduced." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">君子之至於斯也</span> has its proper possessive power,&#8212;"In the case of a <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chün-tzŭ's</i> coming to this." <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽung</i>, the 4th tone, "to attend upon." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">二三子</span>, "Two or three sons," or "gentlemen," = "my friends." The same idiom occurs elsewhere. The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">木鐸</span> was a metal bell with a wooden tongue, shaken in making announcements, or to call people together. Heaven would employ Confucius to proclaim the truth and right. <a href="chapter-3-24.xhtml#noteref-241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The comparative merits of the music of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shun</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-3-25.xhtml#noteref-242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">韶</span> was the name of the music made by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shun</span>, perfect in melody and sentiment. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">武</span> was the music of king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>, also perfect in melody, but breathing the martial air, indicative of its author. <a href="chapter-3-25.xhtml#noteref-243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The disregard of what is essential vitiates all services.</b> <a href="chapter-3-26.xhtml#noteref-244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The meaning of the chapter turns upon <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">何以</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">何有</span>, or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">以何者</span>, "wherewith." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">寬</span> is essential to rulers, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">敬</span> to ceremonies, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">哀</span> to mourning. <a href="chapter-3-26.xhtml#noteref-245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><strong>Headings of this book.</strong>&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">里仁第四</span>, "Virtue in a neighbourhood, <abbr>No.</abbr> 4."&#8212;Such is the title of this forth Book, which is mostly occupied with the subject of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仁</span>. To render that term invariably by <em>benevolence</em>, would by no means suit many of the chapters. See <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 2</cite>. <em>Virtue</em>, as a general term, would answer better. The embodiment of virtue demands an acquaintance with ceremonies and music, treated of in the last Book; and this, it is said, is the reason why the one subject immediately follows the other. <a href="chapter-4-1.xhtml#noteref-246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Rule for the selection of a residence.</b> <a href="chapter-4-1.xhtml#noteref-247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to the <span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">周禮</span>, five families made a <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鄰</span>, and five <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鄰</span> a <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">里</span>, which we might style, therefore, a <em>hamlet</em> or <em>village</em>. There are other estimates of the number of its component households. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">處</span>, 3rd tone, a verb, "to dwell in." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">知</span>, 4th tone, is the same as <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">智</span>, "wise," "wisdom." So, not unfrequently, below. Friendship, we have seen, is for the aid of virtue (<cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 3</cite>), and the same should be the object desired in selecting a residence. <a href="chapter-4-1.xhtml#noteref-248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Only true virtue adapts a man for the varied conditions of life.</b> <a href="chapter-4-2.xhtml#noteref-249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">約</span>, "to bind," is used for what binds, as an oath, a covenant; and here, the metaphor being otherwise directed, it denotes a condition of poverty and distress. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">利</span>, "gain," "profit," used as a verb, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">貪</span>, "to desire," "to covet." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">安仁</span>, "to rest in virtue," being virtuous without effort. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">利仁</span>, "to desire virtue," being virtuous because it is the best policy. Observe how <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">者</span> following <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仁</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">知</span> makes those terms adjectives or participles. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不可</span>, "may not," = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不能</span>, "cannot." The inability is moral. <a href="chapter-4-2.xhtml#noteref-250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Only in the good man are emotions of love and hared right, and to be depended on.</b> <a href="chapter-4-3.xhtml#noteref-251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This chapter in incorporated with the <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">大學傳</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span></cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">好</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">惡</span> (read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">wu</i>) are both verbs in the 4th tone. <a href="chapter-4-3.xhtml#noteref-252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The virtuous will preserves from all wickedness.</b> <a href="chapter-4-4.xhtml#noteref-253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">苟</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">誠</span>, not merely&#8212;"if," but "if really." <abbr>Comp.</abbr> the statement <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="se.name.publication.book">John</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 9</cite>, "Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin." <a href="chapter-4-4.xhtml#noteref-254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The devotion of the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chün-tzŭ</i> to virtue.</b> <a href="chapter-4-5.xhtml#noteref-255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the antecedent to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> in the recurring <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">得之</span>, we are to look to the following verbs, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">處</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">去</span>. We might translate the first <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不以道得之</span>, "if <em>they</em> cannot be obtained, <abbr>etc.</abbr>," but this would not suit the second case. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其道</span>, "<em>the</em> way," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> the proper way. If we supply a <abbr>nom.</abbr> to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">處</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">去</span>, it must be <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">君子</span>;&#8212;he will not "abide in," nor "go away from," riches and honours. <a href="chapter-4-5.xhtml#noteref-256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">惡</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">wu</i>, the 1st tone, "how." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">名</span>, "name," not reputation, but the name of a <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chün-tzŭ</i>, which he bears. <a href="chapter-4-5.xhtml#noteref-257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">終食之間</span>, "The space in which a meal can be <em>finished</em>;" meaning a short time. <a href="chapter-4-5.xhtml#noteref-258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">造次</span> (interchangeable with <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">草次</span>) and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顛沛</span> are well-known expressions, the former for haste and confusion, the latter for change and danger; but it is not easy to trace the attaching of those meanings to the characters. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顛</span>, "to fall down," and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">沛</span>, the same, but the former with the face up, the other with the face down. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">必於是</span>;&#8212;<abbr>comp.</abbr> Horace's "<i xml:lang="la">Omnis in hoc sum.</i>" <a href="chapter-4-5.xhtml#noteref-259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>A lament because of the rarity of the love of virtue; and encouragement to practice virtue.</b> <a href="chapter-4-6.xhtml#noteref-260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first four <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">者</span> belong to the verbs <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">好</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">惡</span>, and give them the force of participles. In <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">使不仁者</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">者</span> belongs to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不仁</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不仁者</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不仁之事</span>. Commonly, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">者</span> = "he or those who," but sometimes also = "that or those things which." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">尚</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">加</span>, "to add to." <cite><i epub:type="se.name.publication.book">Morrison</i>, character <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">尚</span></cite>, translates the sentence wrongly&#8212;"He who loves virtue and benevolence can have nothing more said in his praise." <a href="chapter-4-6.xhtml#noteref-261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">蓋</span> here is <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">疑辭</span>, "a particle of doubt;" as often. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">未之有</span>, a transposition, as in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-4-6.xhtml#noteref-262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><strong>A man is not to be utterly condemned because he has faults.</strong> Such is the sentiment found in this chapter, in which we may say, however, that Confucius is liable to the charge brought against <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-hsia</span>, <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-4-7.xhtml#noteref-263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">人之過也</span> stands absolutely,&#8212;"As to the faults of men." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">各</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">各人</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">於</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">從</span>,&#8212;"Each man follows his class." Observe the force of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">過</span>, "what goes beyond." The faults are the excesses of the general tendencies. Compare Goldsmith's line, "And even his failings leant to virtue's side." <a href="chapter-4-7.xhtml#noteref-264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The importance of knowing the right way.</b> <a href="chapter-4-8.xhtml#noteref-265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>One is perplexed to translate <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道</span> here. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu</span> defines it&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">事物當然之理</span>, "the principles of what is right in events and things." Better is the explanation in <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書翼註</span></cite>,&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道即率性之道</span>, "<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道</span> is the path"&#8212;<abbr>i.e.</abbr> <em>of action</em>&#8212;"which is in accordance with our nature." Man is formed for this, and if he die without coming to the knowledge of it, his death is no better than that of a beast. One would fain recognise in such sentences a vague apprehension of some higher truth than Chinese sages have been able to propound.&#8212;"Could I once hear of the prevalence of right principles, I could die the same evening!" Other views of the meaning have been proposed. <a href="chapter-4-8.xhtml#noteref-266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The pursuit of truth should raise a man above being ashamed of poverty.</b> <a href="chapter-4-9.xhtml#noteref-267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與議</span>,&#8212;to be discoursed with <abbr>i.e.</abbr> about <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道</span>, or "truth," which perhaps is the best translation of the term in places like this. <a href="chapter-4-9.xhtml#noteref-268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Righteousness is the rule of the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chün-tzŭ's</i> practice.</b> <a href="chapter-4-10.xhtml#noteref-269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">君子之云云</span>, "The relation of the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chün-tzŭ</i> to the world, <abbr>i.e.</abbr> to all things presenting themselves to him. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">適</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ti</i>, is explained by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">尊主</span>, "to set the mind exclusively on." We may take the last clause thus:&#8212;"his is the according with, and keeping near to (<spanzh>比</spanzh>, the 4th tone, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">從</span> or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">親</span>) righteousness." This gives each character its signification, the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span> blending its meaning with <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">比</span>. <a href="chapter-4-10.xhtml#noteref-270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The different mindings of the superior and the small man.</b> <a href="chapter-4-11.xhtml#noteref-271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huai</i> is here emphatic, = "<em>cherishes</em> and plans about." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">土</span>, "earth," "the ground," is here defined&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">所處之安</span>, "the rest or comforts one dwells amidst." May it not be used somewhat in our sense of earthly?&#8212;"thinks of what is earthly." <a href="chapter-4-11.xhtml#noteref-272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The consequence of selfish conduct.</b> <a href="chapter-4-12.xhtml#noteref-273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">放</span>, the 3rd tone, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">依</span>, "to accord with," "to keep along."&#8212;"He who acts along the line of gain." <a href="chapter-4-12.xhtml#noteref-274" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The influence in government of ceremonies observed in their proper spirit.</b> <a href="chapter-4-13.xhtml#noteref-275" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-276" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">禮譲字是二是一</span>, <abbr>i.e.</abbr> they are a hendiadys. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">譲</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">禮之實</span>, "the sincerity and substance of ceremony," the <em>spirit</em> of it. <abbr>Comp.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">和</span> in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span></cite> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">治</span>, "to govern." This meaning is found in the dictionary. <a href="chapter-4-13.xhtml#noteref-276" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Advising to self-cultivation.</b> <a href="chapter-4-14.xhtml#noteref-277" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Comp.</abbr> <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span></cite>. Here, as there, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不</span> not being imperative, we must supply a nominative. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">位</span>, "a place," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> an official situation. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">所以立</span> is to be completed <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">所以立乎其位</span>. <a href="chapter-278.xhtml#noteref-278" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-279" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><strong>Confucius's doctrine that of a pervading unity.</strong> This chapter is said to be the most profound in the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yü</i>. <a href="chapter-4-15.xhtml#noteref-279" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">吾道一以貫之</span>;&#8212;to myself it occurs to translate, "my doctrines have one thing which goes through them," but such an exposition has not been approved by any Chinese write. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">一以貫之</span> are made to contain the copula and predicate of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">吾道</span>; and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span>, it is said, "refers to all affairs and all things." The one thing or unity intended by Confucius was the heart, man's nature, of which all the relations and duties of life are only the development and outgoings. <a href="chapter-4-15.xhtml#noteref-280" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">忠</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">恕</span>, which seem to be two things, are both formed from <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">心</span>, "the heart," <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">忠</span> being compounded of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">中</span>, "middle," "centre," and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">心</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">恕</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">如</span> "as," and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">心</span>. The "centre heart" = I, the <em>ego</em>; and the "as heart" = the I in sympathy with others. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">忠</span> is duty-doing, on a consideration, or from the impulse, of one's own self; <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">恕</span> duty-doing, on the principle of reciprocity. The chapter dhows that Confucius only claimed to enforce duties indicated by man's mental constitution. Observe <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">唯</span> is 3rd tone, = "yes." Some say that <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">門人</span> must mean <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng's</span> own disciples, and that, had they been those of Confucius, we should have read <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">弟子</span>. The criticism cannot be depended on. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而已矣</span> is a very emphatic "and nothing more." <a href="chapter-4-15.xhtml#noteref-281" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-282" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How righteousness and selfishness distinguish the superior man and the small man.</b> <a href="chapter-4-16.xhtml#noteref-282" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-283" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">喻</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">曉</span>, "to understand." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">於</span> is here to be dwelt on, and may be compared with the Hebrew <i xml:lang="he">eth</i>. <a href="chapter-4-16.xhtml#noteref-283" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-284" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The lessons to be learned from observing mean of different characters.</b> <a href="chapter-4-17.xhtml#noteref-284" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-285" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Of the final particles <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">焉</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也</span>, it is said, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">二字頗有抑揚警醒意</span>, "the two characters have something of a repressive, expansive, warning force." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen's</span> text has a <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">者</span> after the second <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">賢</span> which is not necessary. <a href="chapter-4-17.xhtml#noteref-285" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-286" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How a son may remonstrate with his parents on their faults.</b> <a href="chapter-4-18.xhtml#noteref-286" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-287" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.nook" xml:lang="zh-Hant">禮記</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 15</cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">幾</span>, the 1st tone, "mildly," = the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">下氣, 怡色, 柔聲</span> of the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">内則</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不違</span> is not abandoning his purpose of remonstrance, and not as <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">包咸</span> says in the comment given by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不敢違父母意</span>, "not daring to go against the mind of his parents." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">勞</span> = "toiled and pained," what the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">内則</span> says, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">撻之流血</span>, "should they beat him till the blood flows." <a href="chapter-4-18.xhtml#noteref-287" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-288" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>A son ought not to go to a distance where he will not able to pay the due services to his parents.</b> <a href="chapter-4-19.xhtml#noteref-288" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-289" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">方</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">一定向</span>, "a fixed direction or quarter," whence he may be recalled, if necessary. <a href="chapter-4-19.xhtml#noteref-289" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-290" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>A repetition of part of <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span></cite>.</b> <a href="chapter-4-20.xhtml#noteref-290" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-291" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>What effect the age of parents should have on their children.</b> <a href="chapter-4-21.xhtml#noteref-291" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-292" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">知</span>, it is said, conveys here <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">念念不忘意</span>, "the meaning of unforgetting thoughtfulness. <a href="chapter-4-21.xhtml#noteref-292" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-293" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The virtue of the ancients seen in their slowness to speak.</b> <a href="chapter-4-22.xhtml#noteref-293" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-294" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Observe the force of the two <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span>&#8212;"The not coming forth of the words of the ancients was shame about the not coming up to them of their actions." <a href="chapter-4-22.xhtml#noteref-294" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-295" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Advantage of caution.</b> <a href="chapter-4-23.xhtml#noteref-295" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-296" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Collie's version, which I have adopted, is here happy. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">約</span>, see <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span></cite>. The "binding" here is of one's self, self-restraint, = "caution." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">失之</span>, "loses <em>it</em>," <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> referring to whatever business the cautious may be engaged in. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span>, after an active verb, often makes it neuter; at least, a neuter verb renders the expression best in English. <a href="chapter-4-23.xhtml#noteref-296" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-297" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Rule of the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chün-tzŭ</i> about his words and actions.</b> <a href="chapter-4-23.xhtml#noteref-297" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-298" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The virtuous are not left alone:&#8212;An encouragement to virtue.</b> <a href="chapter-4-24.xhtml#noteref-298" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-299" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孤</span>, "fatherless;" here = solitary, friendless. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">德不孤</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">德無孤立之理</span>, "it is not the nature of virtue to be left to stand along." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鄰</span>, see <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span></cite>; here generally used for friends, associates of like mind. <a href="chapter-4-25.xhtml#noteref-299" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-300" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>A lesson to counsellors and friends.</b> <a href="chapter-4-26.xhtml#noteref-300" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-301" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">數</span>, the 4th tone, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shu</i>, "frequently," understood here in reference to remonstrating or reproving. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">斯</span> = "this," "this leads to," or "thereon is." <a href="chapter-4-26.xhtml#noteref-301" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-302" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><strong>Heading of this book.</strong>&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公冶長第五</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-yeh Chʽang</span>, the surname and name of the first individual spoken of in it, heads this Book, which is chiefly occupied with the judgement of the sage on the character of several of his disciples and others. As the decision frequently turns on their being possessed of that <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">jên</i>, or perfect virtue, which is so conspicuous in the last Book, this is the reason, it is said, why the one immediately follows the other. As <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-kung</span> appears in the Book several times, some have fancied that it was compiled by his disciples. <a href="chapter-5-1.xhtml#noteref-302" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-303" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius in marriage-making was guided by character and not by fortune.</b> <a href="chapter-5-1.xhtml#noteref-303" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-304" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-yeh Chʽang</span>, though the son-in-law of Confucius, nothing certain is known, and his tablet is only 3rd on the west, among the <i xml:lang="grc">οί πολλοί</i>. Silly legends are told of his being put in prison from his bringing suspicion on himself by his knowledge of the language of birds. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> approves the interpretation of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">縲</span> as meaning "a black rope," with which criminals were anciently bound (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">絏</span>) in prison. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">妻</span> and in <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> 2</cite>, the 3rd tone, "to wive," "to give a wife to one." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">子</span>, in both this and the next chapter, = "a daughter." Confucius's brother would be the cripple <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng-pʽi</span>;&#8212;[SEE P.58.] <a href="chapter-5-1.xhtml#noteref-304" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-305" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Nan Jung</span>, another of the disciples, is now 4th, east, in the outer hall. The discussions about who he was, and whether he is to be identified with <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">南宮适</span>, and several other <em>aliases</em>, are very perplexing. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">廢</span>, "to lay, or be laid aside," <em>from office</em>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">戮</span>, "to put to death," has also the lighter meaning of "disgrace." We cannot tell whether Confucius is giving his impression of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jung's</span> character, or referring to events that had taken place. <a href="chapter-5-2.xhtml#noteref-305" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-306" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chün-tzŭ</span> formed by intercourse with other <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chün-tzŭ</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-5-3.xhtml#noteref-306" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-307" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-chien</span>, by surname <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">宓</span> (= <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">虙</span>, and said to be <abbr>i.q.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">伏</span>), and named <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不齊</span>, appears to have been of some note among the disciples of Confucius as an administrator, though his tablet is now only 2nd, west, in the outer hall. See the <cite><i epub:type="se.name.publication.book:">Narratives of the School</i>, <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxviii</span></cite>. What chiefly distinguished him, as appears here, was his cultivation of the friendship of men of ability and virtue. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">若人</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">若此人</span>, "a man such as this." See the <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">註疏</span> in <abbr class="eoc">loc.</abbr></cite> The first <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">斯</span> is "this <em>man</em>;" the second, "this <em>virtue</em>." The paraphrasts complete the last clause thus:&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">斯將何所取以成斯德乎</span>, "what friends must this man have chosen to complete this virtue!" <a href="chapter-5-3.xhtml#noteref-307" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-308" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><strong>Whereto <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-kung</span> had attained.</strong> See <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span></cite>; <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-5-4.xhtml#noteref-308" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-309" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">瑚璉</span> were vessels richly adorned, used to contain grain-offerings in the royal ancestral temples. Under the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsia</span> dynasty they were called, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">璉</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">瑚</span> under the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yin</span>. See the <cite><i epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Chi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span></cite>. While the sage did not grant to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzʽŭ</span> that he was a <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chün-tzŭ</i> (<cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span></cite>), he made him "a vessel of honour," valuable and fit for use on high occasions. <a href="chapter-5-4.xhtml#noteref-309" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-310" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan Yung</span>:&#8212;Readiness with the tongue no part of virtue.</b> <a href="chapter-5-5.xhtml#noteref-310" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-311" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">冉雍</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仲弓</span>, has his tablet the 2nd, on the east, among "the wise ones." His father was a worthless character (see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span></cite>), but he himself was the opposite. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">佞</span> means "ability," generally; then "ability of speech," often, though not here, with the bad sense of artfulness and flattery. <a href="chapter-5-5.xhtml#noteref-311" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-312" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Confucius would not grant that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yung</span> was <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仁</span>, but his not being <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">佞</span> was in his favour rather than otherwise. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">口給</span> (read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chi</i>: see <cite><abbr>dict.</abbr></cite>), "smartnesses of speech." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">焉</span> is here "why," rather than "how." The first <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">焉用仁</span> is a general statement, not having special reference to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan Yung</span>. In the <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">註疏</span></cite>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不知其仁焉用佞</span> is read as one sentence:&#8212;"I do not know how the virtuous should also use readiness of speech." <a href="chapter-5-5.xhtml#noteref-312" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-313" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi-tiao Kʽai's</span> opinion of the qualifications necessary to taking office.</b> <a href="chapter-5-6.xhtml#noteref-313" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-314" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi-tiao</span>, now 6th, on the east, in the outer hall, was styled <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子若</span>. His name originally was <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">啟</span>, changed into <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">開</span> on the accession of the emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孝景</span>, <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 156, whose name was also <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">啟</span>. <a href="chapter-5-6.xhtml#noteref-314" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-315" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The difficulty is with <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">斯</span>&#8212;what does it refer to? and with <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">信</span>&#8212;what is its force? In the chapter about the disciples in the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">家語</span>, it is said that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽai</span> was reading in the <i epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-ching</i>, when Confucius spoke to him about taking office, and he pointed to the book, or some particular passage in it, saying "I am not yet able to rest in the assurance of (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">信</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">真知確見</span>) <em>this</em>." It may have been so. <abbr>Obs.</abbr> the force of the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> <a href="chapter-5-6.xhtml#noteref-315" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-316" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius proposing to withdraw from the world:&#8212;A lesson to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-lu</span></b> <a href="chapter-5-7.xhtml#noteref-316" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-317" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-lu</span> supposed his master really meant to leave the world, and the idea of floating along the coasts pleased his ardent temper. But Confucius only expressed in this way his regret at the backwardness of men to receive his doctrines. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">無所取材</span> is difficult of interpretation. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> takes <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">材</span> as being for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">裁</span>, "to cut out clothes," "to estimate, discriminate," and hence the meaning in the translation. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鄭玄</span>, keeping the meaning of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">材</span>, explains&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">無所取於桴材</span>, = "my meaning is not to be found in the <em>raft</em>." Another old writer makes <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">材</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">哉</span>, and putting a stop at <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">勇</span> explains&#8212;"<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yu</span> is fond of daring; he cannot go beyond himself to find my meaning." <a href="chapter-5-7.xhtml#noteref-317" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-318" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-lu</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-yu</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-hua</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-5-8.xhtml#noteref-318" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-319" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孟武伯</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-5-8.xhtml#noteref-319" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-320" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">千乘之國</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-5-8.xhtml#noteref-320" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-321" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">賦</span>, properly "revenues," "taxes," but the quota of soldiers contributed being regulated by the amount of the revenue, the term is used here for the forces, or <em>military levies</em>. <a href="chapter-5-8.xhtml#noteref-321" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-322" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">求</span> see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-5-8.xhtml#noteref-322" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-323" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">百乘之家</span>, in opposition to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">千乘之國</span>, was the secondary fief, the territory appropriated to the highest nobles or officers in a <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">國</span> or state, supposed also to comprehend 1000 families <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲之宰</span>, "to be its governor." This is a peculiar idiom, something like the double object in Latin. <a href="chapter-5-8.xhtml#noteref-323" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-324" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽih</span>, surnamed <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公西</span>, and styled <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子華</span>, having now the 14th place, west, in the outer hall, was famous among the disciples for his knowledge of rules of ceremony, and those especially relating to dress and intercourse. <a href="chapter-5-8.xhtml#noteref-324" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-325" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">朝</span>, in 2nd tone. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">賓</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">客</span> may be distinguished, the former indicating neighbouring princes visiting the court; the latter, ministers and officers of the State present as guests. <a href="chapter-5-8.xhtml#noteref-325" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-326" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Superiority of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Hui</span> to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-kung</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-5-9.xhtml#noteref-326" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-327" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">望</span>, "to look to," "to look up to," here = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">比</span>, "to compare with." "One" is the beginning of numbers, and "ten" the completion; hence the meaning of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">聞一以知十</span>, as in the translation. <a href="chapter-5.9.xhtml#noteref-327" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-328" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">許</span>, "to allow," "to grant to." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yeh</span> gives here the <abbr>comm.</abbr> of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">包咸</span> (about <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 50), who interprets strangely,&#8212;"I and you are both not equal to him," saying that Confucius thus comforted <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-kung</span>. <a href="chapter-5-9.xhtml#noteref-328" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-329" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The idleness of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsai Yü</span> and its reproof.</b> <a href="chapter-5-10.xhtml#noteref-329" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-330" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">於予與</span>, "In the case of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yü</span>!" <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span> has here the force of an exclamation; so below. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">誅</span>, a strong term, to mark the severity of the reproof. <a href="chapter-5-10.xhtml#noteref-330" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-331" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子曰</span> is superfluous. The characters were probably added by a transcriber. If not, they should head another chapter. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsai Yü</span>,&#8212;the same as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsai Wo</span> in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-5-10.xhtml#noteref-331" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-332" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Unbending virtue cannot co-exist with indulgence of the passions.</b> <a href="chapter-5-11.xhtml#noteref-332" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-333" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shên Chʽêng</span> (there are several <em>aliases</em>, but they are disputed) was one of the minor disciples, of whom little or nothing is known. He was styled <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子周</span>, and his place is 31st, east, in the outer ranges. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">剛</span> is to be understood with reference to virtues. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">慾</span> is <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">情所好</span>, "what the passions love," "lusts." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">焉得</span> are said to = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不是</span>, and not <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不能</span>. I have translated accordingly. <a href="chapter-5-11.xhtml#noteref-333" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-334" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><strong>The difficulty of attaining to the not wishing to do to others as we wish them not to do to us.</strong> It is said&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">此章見無我之不易及</span>, "this chapter shows that the no <em>I</em> (freedom from selfishness) is not easily reached." <a href="chapter-3-12.xhtml#noteref-334" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-335" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">中庸</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span></cite>, it is said&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">施諸己而不願亦勿施諸人</span>, "what you do not like when done to yourself, do not do to others." The difference between it and the sentence here is said to be that of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">恕</span>, "reciprocity;" and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仁</span>, "benevolence," or the highest virtue, apparent in the adverbs <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">勿</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">無</span>, the one prohibitive, and the other a simple, unconstrained negation. The golden rule of the Gospel is higher than both,&#8212;"Do ye unto others as ye would that others should do unto you." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">諸</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">於</span>; <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">加諸</span>, or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">加於</span>, "to add upon," "to do to." <a href="chapter-5-12.xhtml#noteref-335" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-336" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><strong>The gradual way in which Confucius communicated his doctrines.</strong> So the lesson of this chapter is summed up, but there is hardly another more perplexing to a translator. <a href="chapter-5-12.xhtml#noteref-336" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-337" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">文章</span> is the common name for essays, elegant literary compositions. Of course that meaning is out of the question. Whatever is <em>figured</em> and <em>brilliant</em> is <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">文</span>; whatever is <em>orderly</em> and <em>defined</em> is <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">章</span>. The <abbr>comm.</abbr>, accordingly, make <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">文</span> to be the deportment and manners of the sage, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">章</span> his ordinary discourses, but <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">聞</span> is an inappropriate term with reference to the former. These things, however, were level to the capacities of the disciples generally, and they had the benefit of them. As to his views about man's nature, as the gift of Heaven, and the way of Heaven generally; these be only communicated to those who were prepared to receive them, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-kung</span> is supposed to have expressed himself thus, after being on some occasion so privileged. <a href="chapter-5-12.xhtml#noteref-337" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-338" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The ardour of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-lu</span> in practising the Master's instructions.</b> <a href="chapter-5-14.xhtml#noteref-338" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-339" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The concluding <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">唯恐有聞</span> is to be completed <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">唯恐復有所聞</span>, as in the translation. <a href="chapter-5-14.xhtml#noteref-339" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-340" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>An example of the principle on which honorary posthumous titles were conferred.</b> <a href="chapter-5-15.xhtml#noteref-340" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-341" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">文</span>, corresponding nearly to our "accomplished," was the posthumous title given to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子圉</span>, an officer of the same surname of the State of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, and a contemporary of Confucius. Many of his actions had been of a doubtful character, which made <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">Tzŭ-kung</span> stumble at the application to him of so honourable an epithet. But Confucius shows that, whategver he might otherwise have been, he <em>had</em> those qualities which justified his eing so denominated. The rule for posthumous titles in China has been, and is, very much&#8212;"<i xml:lang="la">De mortuis nil nisi bonum.</i>" <a href="chapter-5-15.xhtml#noteref-341" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-342" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The excellent qualities of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-chʽan</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-5-16.xhtml#noteref-342" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-343" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-chʽan</span>, named <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公孫僑</span>, was the chief minister of the State of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鄭</span>), the ablest, perhaps, and most upright of all the statesmen among Confucius's contemporaries. The sage wept when he heard of his death. The old interpreters take <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">使</span> in the sense of "employing," but it seems to express more, and = "ordering," "regulating." <a href="chapter-5-16.xhtml#noteref-343" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-344" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How to maintain friendship.</b> <a href="chapter-5-17.xhtml#noteref-344" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-345" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Familiarity breeds contempt," and with contempt friendship ends. It was not so with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Pʽing</span>, another of the worthies of Confucius's time. He was a principal minister of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">齊</span>), by name <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">嬰</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pʽing</span> (= "Ruling and averting calamity") was his posthumous title. If we were to render <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仲</span>, the name would be "<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Pʽing</span>, <i xml:lang="la">secundus</i>." The antecedent to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> is <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">人</span>. <a href="chapter-5-17.xhtml#noteref-345" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-346" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><strong>The superstition of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsang Wên</span>.</strong> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsang Wên</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span> is the honorary epithet, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仲</span>, see <cite>last chapter</cite>) had been a great officer in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, and left a reputation for wisdom, which Confucius did not think was deserved. His full name was <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">臧孫辰</span>. He was descended from the duke <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孝</span> (<abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 794&#8211;767), whose son was styled <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子臧</span>. This <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsang</span> was taken by his descendants as their surname. Such was one of the ways in which surnames were formed among the Chinese. <a href="chapter-5-18.xhtml#noteref-346" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-347" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">蔡</span>, "a large tortoise," so called, because the State of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽai</span> was famous for its tortoises. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">居</span> is sued as an active verb, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">藏</span>. The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">節</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">柱頭斗棋</span>, "the capitals of the pillars." The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">梲</span> may be seen in any Chinese house where the whole structure of the roof is displayed, and these small pillars are very conspicuous. The old critics make the keeping such a tortoise an act of usurpation on the part of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsang Wên</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> finds the point of Confucius's words in the keeping it in such a style. <a href="chapter-5-18.xhtml#noteref-347" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-348" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The praise of perfect virtue is not to be lightly accorded.</b> <a href="chapter-5-19.xhtml#noteref-348" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-349" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ling-yin</span>, <abbr>lit.</abbr> "good corrector," was the name given to the chief minister of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">楚</span>). <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">尹</span> is still applied to officers; <abbr>e.g.</abbr> the prefect of a department is called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">府尹</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-wên</span>, surnamed <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鬬</span>, and named <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">穀於菟</span> ("suckled by a tiger"), had been noted for the things mentioned by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-chang</span>, but the sage would not concede that he was therefore <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仁</span>. <a href="chapter-5-19.xhtml#noteref-349" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-350" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">崔</span> was a great officer of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Pʽing</span> (<cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span></cite>) distinguished himself on the occasion of the murder (<abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 547) here referred to. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên Wên</span> was likewise an officer of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之一邦</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> is a verb, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">往</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">乘</span>, 4th tone, as in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span></cite>, butr with a different meaning, = "a team of four horses." <a href="chapter-5-19.xhtml#noteref-350" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-351" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Prompt decision good.</b> <a href="chapter-5-20.xhtml#noteref-351" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-352" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span> was the posthumous title of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">季行夫</span>, a faithful and disinterested officer of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">三</span>, 4th tone, "three times," but some say it = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">二三</span>, "again and again." <abbr>Comp.</abbr> Robert Hall's remark&#8212;"In matters of conscience first thoughts are best." <a href="chapter-5-20.xhtml#noteref-352" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-353" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The uncommon but admirable stupidity of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ning Wu</span></b> <a href="chapter-5-21.xhtml#noteref-5-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-354" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Nine Wu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">武</span>, honorary epithet; see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span></cite>) was an officer of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> in the time of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span> (<abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 660&#8211;635). In the first part of his official life the State was quiet and prosperous, and he "wisely" acquitted himself of his duties. Afterwards came confusion. The prince was driven from the throne, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ning Yü</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">俞</span> was his name) might, like other wise men, have retired from the danger. But he "foolishly," as it seemed, chose to follow the fortunes of his prince, and yet adroitly brought it about in the end, that the prince was reinstated and order restored. <a href="chapter-5-21.xhtml#noteref-354" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-355" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The anxiety of Confucius about the training of his disciples.</b> <a href="chapter-5-22.xhtml#noteref-355" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-356" epub:type="endnote">
				</li>
				<li id="note-357" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The generosity of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po-i</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-chʽi</span> and its effects.</b> <a href="chapter-5-23.xhtml#noteref-357" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-358" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These were ancient worthies of the closing period of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shang</span> dynasty. Compare <cite><i epub:type="se.name.publication.book">Mencius</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>ch.</abbr> 2, et <abbr class="eoc">al.</abbr></cite> They were brothers, sons of the king of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ku-chu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孤竹</span>), named respectively <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">允</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">致</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">I</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> are their honorary epithets, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">伯</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">叔</span> only indicate their relation to each other as elder and younger. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po-i</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-chʽi</span>, however, are in effect their names in the mouths and writings of the Chinese. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ku-chu</span> was a small State, included in the present department of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">永平</span>, in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pei-chih-li</span>. Their father left his kingdom to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-chʽi</span>, who refused to take the place of his elder brother. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po-i</span> in turn declined the throne; so they both abandoned it, and retired into obscurity. When king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> was taking his measures against the tyrant <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>, they made their appearance, and remonstrated against his course. Finally, they died of hunger, rather than live under the new dynasty. They were celebrated for their purity, and aversion to men whom they considered bad, but Confucius here bring out their generosity. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">怨是用希</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">怨是以希</span>, "Resentments thereby were few." <a href="chapter-5-23.xhtml#noteref-358" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-359" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Small meannesses inconsistent with uprightness.</b> <a href="chapter-5-24.xhtml#noteref-359" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-360" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is implied that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kao</span> gave the vinegar as from himself. He was a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, with a reputation better than he deserved to have. <a href="chapter-5-24.xhtml#noteref-360" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-361" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Praise of sincerity, and of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tso Chʽiu-ming</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-5-25.xhtml#noteref-361" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-362" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">巧言令色</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span></cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">足恭</span>, "excessive respect," <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">足</span> being in 4th tone read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chü</i>. Some of the old commentators, keeping the usual tone and meaning of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">足</span>, interpret the phrase of movements of the "feet" to indicate respect. The discussions about <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tso Chʽiu-ming</span> are endless. See <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">拓餘説</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span></cite>. It is sufficient for us to rest in the judgement of the commentator <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">程</span>, that "he was an ancient of reputation." It is not to be received that he was a disciple of COnfucius, the same whose supplement to the <i epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽun Chʽiu</i> chronicles the death of the sage, and carries on the history for many subsequent years. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">丘</span> was the name of COnfucius. The Chinese decline pronouncing it, always substituting <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mou</i> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">某</span>) "such a one," for it. <a href="chapter-5-25.xhtml#noteref-362" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-363" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The different wishes of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Yüan</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-lu</span>, and Confucius.</b> <a href="chapter-5-26.xhtml#noteref-363" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-364" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">盍各言爾至</span>, "why not each tell your will?" <a href="chapter-5-26.xhtml#noteref-364" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-365" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A student is apt to translate&#8212;"I should like to have chariots and horses, <abbr>etc.</abbr>," but <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">共</span> is the important word in the paragraph, and under the regimen of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">願</span> on to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span>, and removing the comma at <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">共</span>, read <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">共敝</span> together, but this construction is not so good. <a href="chapter-5-26.xhtml#noteref-365" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-366" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen's</span> compilation <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">施勞</span> is interpreted, "not to impose troublesome affairs on others." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi's</span> view is better. <a href="chapter-5-26.xhtml#noteref-366" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-367" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">信之</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與之以信</span>, "To be with them with sincerity."&#8212;The Master and the disciples, it is said, agreed in being devoid of selfishness. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui's</span> however, was seen in a higher style of mind and object than <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yu's</span>. In the sage there was an unconsciousness of self, and without any effort he proposed acting in regard to his classification of men just as they ought severally to be acted to. <a href="chapter-5-26.xhtml#noteref-367" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-368" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>A lament over men's persistence in error.</b> <a href="chapter-5-27.xhtml#noteref-368" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-369" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">乎</span> has an exclamatory force. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">訟</span>, "to litigate." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">内自訟者</span>, "one who bring himself before the bar of his conscience." The remark affirms a fact, inexplicable on Confucius's view of the nature of man. But perhaps such an exclamation should not be pressed too closely. <a href="chapter-5-27.xhtml#noteref-369" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-370" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The humble claim of Confucius for himself.</b> <a href="chapter-5-28.xhtml#noteref-370" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-371" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">邑</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">人聚會之稱也</span>) is "the designation of the place where men are collected together," and may be applied from a hamlet upwards to a city. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">忠</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">忠厚</span>, "honourable," "substantial." Confucius thus did not claim higher natural and moral qualities than others, but sought to perfect himself by learning. <a href="chapter-5-28.xhtml#noteref-371" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-372" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><strong>Heading of this Book.</strong>&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">雍也第六</span>. "There is <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yung</span>!" commences the first chapter, and stands as the title of the Book. Its subjects are much akin to those of the preceding Book, and therefore, it is said, they are in juxtaposition. <a href="chapter-6-1.xhtml#noteref-372" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-373" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The characters of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan Yung</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-sang Po-tzŭ</span>, as regards their aptitude for government.</b> <a href="chapter-6-1.xhtml#noteref-373" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-374" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yung</span>, <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span></cite>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">可使南面</span>, "might be employed with his face to the south." In China the sovereign sits facing the south. So did the princes of the States in their several courts in Confucius's time. An explanation of the practice is attempted in the <cite><i epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi-ching</i>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">説卦</span>, <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span></cite>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">離也者明也, 萬物皆相見, 南方之卦也, 聖人南面而聽天下, 向明而治蓋取此也</span>, "The diagram <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li</span> conveys the idea of brightness, when all things are exhibited to one another. It is the diagram of the south. The custom of the sages (<abbr>i.e.</abbr> monarchs) to sit with their faces to the south, <em>and listen to the representations</em> of all in the kingdom, governing towards the bright region, was taken from this." <a href="chapter-6-1.xhtml#noteref-374" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-375" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chung-kung</span> was the designation of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan Yung</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-6-1.xhtml#noteref-375" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-376" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">簡</span> has here substantially the same meaning as in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span></cite>, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不煩</span>, "not troubling," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> one's self about small matters. With reference to that place, however, the <abbr>dict.</abbr>, after the old <abbr>comm.</abbr>, explains it by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">大</span>, "great." Of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-sang Po-tzŭ</span> we know nothing certain but waht is here stated. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> seems to be wrong in approving the identification of him with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-sang Hu</span> of <cite><i epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> <abbr>par.</abbr> 11</cite>. <a href="chapter-6-1.xhtml#noteref-376" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-377" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">居敬</span>, "to dwell in respect," to have the mind imbued with it. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">敬</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">敬事</span> as in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-6-1.xhtml#noteref-377" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-378" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The rarity of a true love to learn. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui's</span> superiority to the other disciples.</b> <a href="chapter-6-2.xhtml#noteref-378" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-379" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">有顔回者</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">者</span> = "that."&#8212;"There was that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Hui</span>." <a href="chapter-6-2.xhtml#noteref-379" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-380" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"He did not transfer his anger," <abbr>i.e.</abbr>his anger was no tumultuary passion in the mind, but was excited by some specific cause, to which alone it was directed. <a href="chapter-6-2.xhtml#noteref-380" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-381" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">短命死矣</span> = "he died an early death," but <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">命</span> conveys also the idea in the translation. The two last clauses are completed thus:&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">今也, 則亡</span> (read as, and = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">無</span>) <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">是人, 未聞如是之好學者也</span>. <a href="chapter-6-2.xhtml#noteref-381" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-382" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Discrimination of Confucius in rewarding or salarying officers.</b> <a href="chapter-6-3.xhtml#noteref-382" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-383" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-hsi Chʽih</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-hua</span>;&#8212;see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 3</cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">使</span>, in 4th tone, "to commission," or "to be commissioned." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> says the commission was a private one from Confucius, but this is not likely. The old interpretation makes it a public one from the court of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>; see <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書改錯</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-6-3.xhtml#noteref-383" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-384" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">冉子</span>, "the disciple <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan</span>;" see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span></cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan</span> is here styled <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子</span>, like <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">有子</span>, in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span></cite>, but only in narrative, not as introducing any wise utterance. <a href="chapter-6-3.xhtml#noteref-384" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-385" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">fu</i> contained 6 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">tou</i> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">斗</span>) and 4 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shêng</i> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">升</span>), or 64 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shêng</i>. <a href="chapter-6-3.xhtml#noteref-385" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-386" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">yü</i> contained 160 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shêng</i>, and the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ping</i> 16 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">hu</i> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">斛</span>), or 1600 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shêng</i>. A <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shêng</i> of the present day is about one-fourth less than an English pint. <a href="chapter-6-3.xhtml#noteref-386" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-387" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">吾聞之</span> refers to what follows. <a href="chapter-6-3.xhtml#noteref-387" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-388" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen's</span> edition, another chapter commences here. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüan Ssŭ</span>, named <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">憲</span>, is now the 3rd, east, in the outer hall of the temples. He was noted for his pursuit of truth, and carelessness of worldly advantages. After the death of Confucius, he withdrew into retirement in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>. It is related by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</span> that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-kung</span>, high in official station, came one day in great style to visit him. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssŭ</span> received him in a tattered coat, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-king</span> asking him if he were ill, he replied, "I have heard that to have no money is to be poor, and that to study truth and not be able to find it is to be ill." The answer sent <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-kung</span> away in confusion. The 900 measures (whatever they were) was the proper allowance for an officer in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssŭ's</span> station. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲之宰</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span></cite>, though it is not easy to give the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> the same reference here as in that passage. <a href="chapter-6-3.xhtml#noteref-388" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-389" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to ancient statutes, a <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">lin</i>, a <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">li</i>, a <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">hsiang</i>, and a <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">tang</i>, had each their specific number of component families, but the meaning is no more than&#8212;"the poor about you." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">乎</span> makes the remark = "may you not, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>" <a href="chapter-6-3.xhtml#noteref-389" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-390" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The vices of a father should not discredit a virtuous son.</b> <a href="chapter-6-4.xhtml#noteref-390" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-391" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The father of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chung-kung</span> (see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span></cite>) was a man of bad character, and some would have visited this upon his son, which drew forth Confucius's remark. The rules of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> dynasty required that sacrificial victims should be red, and have good horns. An animal with those qualities, though it might spring from one not possessing them, would certainly not be unacceptable on that account to the spirits sacrificed to. I translate <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子</span> by "calf," but it is not implied that the victim was young. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">舍</span>, the 3rd tone, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">捨</span>, "to lay aside," "to put away." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其舍諸</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其舍之乎</span>. <a href="chapter-6-4.xhtml#noteref-391" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-392" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The superiority of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui</span> to the other disciples.</b> <a href="chapter-6-5.xhtml#noteref-392" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-393" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is impossible to say whether we should translate here about <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui</span> in the past or present tense. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">違</span> is not <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">違背</span>, "to oppose," but <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">違去</span>, "to depart from." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">日月至</span>, "come to it," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> the line of perfect virtue, "in the course of a day, or a month." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">日月</span> may also be, "for a day or a month." So in the <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">註疏</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-6-5.xhtml#noteref-393" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-394" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The qualities of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-lu</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-kung</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-yu</span>, and their competency to assist in government.</b> <a href="chapter-6-6.xhtml#noteref-394" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-395" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The prince is called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲政者</span>, "the <em>doer</em> of government;" his ministers and officers are styled <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">從政者</span>, "the <em>followers</em> of government." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也與</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">何有</span> are set, the one expression against the other, the former indicating a doubt of the competency of the disciples, the latter affirming their more than competency. <a href="chapter-6-6.xhtml#noteref-395" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-396" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Min Tzŭ-chʽien</span> refuses to serve the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi</span> family</b> <a href="chapter-6-7.xhtml#noteref-396" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-397" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The tablet of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-chʽien</span>(his name was <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">損</span>) is now the first on the east among "the wise ones" of the temple. He was among the foremost of the disciples. Confucius praises his filial piety, and we see here, how he could stand firm in his virtue, and refuse the proffers of the powerful but unprincipled families of his time. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">使</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">使人來召</span>, in the translation, and in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">復</span> (<i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">fu</i>, 4th tone) <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">我者</span>, we must similarly understand <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">復來召我者</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">費</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pi</i>, was a place belonging to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi</span> family. Its name is still preserved in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">費縣</span> in the department of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">沂州</span>, in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">Shan-tung</span>. The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span> stream divided <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">Tzŭ-chʽien</span> threatens, if he should be troubled again, to retreat to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>, where the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi</span> family could not reach him. <a href="chapter-6-7.xhtml#noteref-397" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-398" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Lament of Confucius over the mortal sickness of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po-niu</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-6-8.xhtml#noteref-398" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-399" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po-niu</span>, "elder or uncle <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Niu</span>," was the denomination of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">冉耕</span>, one of the disciples of the sage. In the old interpretation, his sickness is said to have been <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">惡疾</span>, "an evil disease," by which name leprosy, called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">癞</span>, is intended, though that character is now employed for "itch." Suffering from such a disease, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po-niu</span> would not see people, and Confucius took his hand through the window. A different explanation is given by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>. He says that sick persons were usually placed on the north side of the apartment; but when the prince visited them, in order that he might appear to them with his face to the south (see <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span></cite>), they were moved to the south. On this occasion, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po-niu's</span> friends wanted to receive Confucius after this royal fashion, which he avoided by not entering the house. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">亡之</span> = "It is killing him." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">夫</span>, the 2nd tone, generally an initial particle = "now." It is here final, and = "alas!" <a href="chapter-6-8.xhtml#noteref-399" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-400" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The happiness of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui</span> independent of his poverty.</b> <a href="chapter-6-9.xhtml#noteref-400" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-401" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">簞</span> was simply a piece of the stem of a bamboo, and the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">瓢</span> half of a gourd cut into two. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">食</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span></cite>. The eulogy turns much on <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其</span> in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其樂</span>, as opposed to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其憂</span>, "<em>his</em> joy," the delight which he had in the doctrines of his master, contrasted with the grief others would have felt under such poverty. <a href="chapter-6-9.xhtml#noteref-401" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-402" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>A high aim and perseverance proper to a student.</b> <a href="chapter-6-10.xhtml#noteref-402" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-403" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Confucius would not admit <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽiu's</span> apology for not attempting more than he did. "Give over in the middle of the way," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> they go as long and as far as they can, and are pursuing when they stop. <a href="chapter-6-10.xhtml#noteref-403" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-404" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How learning should be pursued.</b> <a href="chapter-6-11.xhtml#noteref-404" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-405" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">君子</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">小人</span> here = adjectives, qualifying <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">儒</span>. The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">君子</span>, it is said, learns <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲己</span> for his own real improvement and from duty; the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">小人</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲人</span>, "for men," with a view to their opinion, and for his own material benefit. We should hardly have judged such a counsel necessary for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">Tzŭ-hsia</span>. <a href="chapter-6-11.xhtml#noteref-405" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-406" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The character of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tan-tʽai Mieh-ming</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-6-12.xhtml#noteref-406" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-407" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The chapter shows, according to Chinese commentators, the advantage to people in authority of their having good men about them. In this way after their usual fashion, they seek for a profound meaning in the remark of Confucius. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tan-tʽai Mieh-ming</span>, who was styled <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子羽</span>, has his tablet the 2nd, east, outside the hall. The accounts of him are conflicting. According to one, he was very good-looking, while another says he was so bad-looking that Confucius at first formed an unfavourable opinion of him, an error which he afterwards confessed on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mieh-ming's</span> becoming eminent. He travelled sourthwards with not a few followers, and places near <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Su-chou</span> and elsewhere retain names indicative of his presence. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">焉爾乎</span>, three particles coming together, are said to indicate the slow and deliberate manner in which the sage spoke. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">滅明者</span>, compare <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顔回者</span> in <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span></cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">室</span> is said to = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公堂</span>. <a href="chapter-6-12.xhtml#noteref-407" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-408" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The virtue of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng Chih-fan</span> in concealing his merit.</b> <a href="chapter-6-13.xhtml#noteref-408" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-409" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>But where was his virtue in deviating from the truth? And how could Confucius commend him for doing so? These questions have never troubled the commentators, nor is it wise to bring a railing accusation against the sage for his words here. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng Chih-fan</span>, named <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">側</span>, was an officer of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. The defeat referred to was in the eleventh year of duke <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ai</span>. To lead the van of an army is called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">啟</span>, to bring up the rear is <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">殿</span>. In retreat the rear is of course the place of honour. <a href="chapter-6-13.xhtml#noteref-409" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-410" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The degeneracy of the age esteeming glibness of tongue and beauty of person.</b> <a href="chapter-6-14.xhtml#noteref-410" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-411" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">祝</span>, "to pray," "prayers;" here, in the concrete, the officer charged with the prayers in the ancestral temple. I have coined the word <i>litanist</i> to come as near to the meaning as possible. The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽo</span> was an officer of the State of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子魚</span>. Prince <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chao</span> had been guilty of incest with his half-sister <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Nan-tzŭ</span> (see <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span></cite>), and afterwards, when she was married to the duke <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ling</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, he served as an officer there, carrying on his wickedness. He was celebrated for his beauty of person. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而</span> is a simple connective, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span>, and the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不</span> is made to belong to both clauses. The old commentators construe differently:&#8212;"If a man have not the speech of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽo</span>, though he may have the beauty of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chao</span>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>," making the degeneracy of the age all turn on its fondness for specious talk. This cannot be right. <a href="chapter-6-14.xhtml#noteref-411" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-412" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>A lament over the waywardness of men's conduct.</b> <a href="chapter-6-15.xhtml#noteref-412" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-413" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">斯道</span>, "these ways," in a moral sense;&#8212;not deep doctrines, but rules of life. <a href="chapter-6-45.xhtml#noteref-413" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-414" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The equal blending of solid excellence and ornamental accomplishments in a complete character.</b> <a href="chapter-6-16.xhtml#noteref-414" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-415" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">史</span>, "a historian," an officer of importance in China. The term, however, is to be understood here of "a clerk," one that is of a class sharp and well informed, but insincere. <a href="chapter-6-16.xhtml#noteref-415" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-416" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Life without uprightness in not true life, and cannot be calculated on.</b> <a href="chapter-6-17.xhtml#noteref-416" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-417" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"No more serious warning than this," says one commentator, "was ever addressed to men by Confucius." A distinction is made by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> and others between the two <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">生</span>;&#8212;the 1st is <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">始生</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">生存</span>, "preservation in life." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">人之生也直</span>, "The being born of man is upright," which may mean either that man at his birth is upright, or that he is born for uprightness. I prefer the latter view. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">罔之生也</span>, "The living without it," if we take <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">罔</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">無</span>, or "to defame it," if <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">罔</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">誣</span>. We long here as elsewhere for more perspicuity and fuller development of view. Without uprightness the end of man's existence isnot fulfilled, but his preservation in such case is not merely a fortunate accident. <a href="chapter-6-17.xhtml#noteref-417" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-418" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Different stages of attainment.</b> <a href="chapter-6-18.xhtml#noteref-418" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-419" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The four <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> have all one reference, which must be <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道</span> or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">理</span>, the subject spoken of. <a href="chapter-6-18.xhtml#noteref-419" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-420" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Teachers must be guided in communicating knowledge by the susceptivity of the learners.</b> <a href="chapter-6-19.xhtml#noteref-420" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-421" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">以上</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">上</span> is read 2nd tone, a verbal word, and not the <abbr>prep.</abbr> "upon," so the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">下</span> in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">以下</span> is also verbal as in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span></cite>. The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">中人</span>, "or mediocre people," may have all classes of subjects announced to them, I suppose. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">語</span> is in the 4th tone, "to tell to." <a href="chapter-6-19.xhtml#noteref-421" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-422" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Chief elements in wisdom and virtue.</b> <a href="chapter-6-20.xhtml#noteref-422" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-423" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fan Chʽih</span>, <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-6-20.xhtml#noteref-423" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-424" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The modern <abbr>comm.</abbr> take <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">民</span> here as = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">人</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">民之義</span> as = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">人道之宜</span>, "what is right according to the principles of humanity." With some hesitation I have assented to this view, though <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">民</span> properly means "the multitude," "the people," and the old interpreters explain&#8212;"Strive to perfect the righteousness of the people." <a href="chapter-6-20.xhtml#noteref-424" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-425" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We may suppose from the second clause that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fan Chʽih</span> was striving after what was uncommon and super human. For a full exhibition of the phrase <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鬼神</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">中庸</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span></cite>. Here it = "spiritual beings," <em>manes</em> and others. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">遠</span>, the 4th tone; <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">遠之</span>, "keep at a distance from them," not "keep them at a distance." The sage's advice there is&#8212;"attend to what are plainly human duties, and do not be superstitious." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">先</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">後</span> are, as frequently, verbs, "put first," "put last." the old interpreters take them differently, but not so well. <a href="chapter-6-20.xhtml#noteref-425" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-426" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Contrasts of the wise and the virtuous.</b> <a href="chapter-6-21.xhtml#noteref-426" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-427" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The two first <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">樂</span> are read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">yao</i>, 4th tone, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">喜好</span>, "to find pleasure in." The wise or knowing are active and restless, like the waters of a stream, ceaselessly flowing and advancing. the virtuous are tranquil and firm, like the stable mountains. The pursuit of knowledge brings joy. The life of the virtuous may be expected to glide calmly on and long. After all, the saying is not very comprehensible. <a href="chapter-6-21.xhtml#noteref-427" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-428" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The condition of the States <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-6-22.xhtml#noteref-428" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-429" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> were both within the present <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shan-tung</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> lay along the coast on the north, embracing the present department of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">青州</span> and other territory. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> was on the south, the larger portion of it being formed by the present department of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">兗州</span>. At the rise of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> dynasty, king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> invested <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lü Shang</span>, a counsellor of king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> and the commander of his army, with the principality of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>. King <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> at his first interview with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lü Shang</span> addressed him as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai-kung Wang</span>, "Grandfather Hope," the man long looked for in his family. This successor, king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽêng</span>, constituted the son of his uncle, the famous duke of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>, prince of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. In Confucius's time, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> had degenerated more than <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道</span> is <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">先王盡善盡美之道</span>, "the entirely good and admirable ways of the former kings." <a href="chapter-6-22.xhtml#noteref-429" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-430" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The name without the reality is folly.</b> <a href="chapter-6-23.xhtml#noteref-430" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-431" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was spoken (see the <cite><span epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">註疏</span></cite>) with reference to the governments of the time, retaining ancient names without ancient principles. The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">觚</span> was a drinking-vessel; others say a wooden tablet. the latter was a later use of the term. It was made with corners as appears from the composition of the character, which is formed from <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">角</span>, "a horn," "a sharp corner." In Confucius's time the form was changed, while the name was kept.&#8212;See the translation in <cite><i epub:type="se.name.publication.book">Williams's Syllabic Dictionary</i></cite>, under syllable <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ku</i>. <a href="chapter-6-23.xhtml#noteref-431" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-432" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The benevolent exercise their benevolence with prudence.</b> <a href="chapter-6-24.xhtml#noteref-432" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-433" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsai Wo</span> could see no limitation to acting on the impulses of benevolence. We are not to suppose with modern scholars that he wished to show that benevolence was impracticable. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">雖</span> belongs to the whole following clause, especially to the mention of a well. The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仁</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仁焉</span> should be <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">人</span>. This happy correction of the text is due to a contemporary and teacher of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> whom he calls <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Pʽing-chün</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其</span>...<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也</span> indicate some doubt in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wo's</span> mind. Observe the <i xml:lang="he">hophal</i> force of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">逝</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">陷</span>. <a href="chapter-6-24.xhtml#noteref-433" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-434" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The happy effect of learning and propriety combined.</b> <a href="chapter-6-25.xhtml#noteref-434" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-435" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">君子</span> has here its lighter meaning, = "the student of what is right and true." The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">約之</span> we naturally refer to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">文</span>, but comparing <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 2</cite>&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">約我以禮</span>&#8212;we may assent to the observation that <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">我指己身</span>, "<em>me</em> refers to the learner's own person." See note on <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span></cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">畔</span>, "the boundary of a field;" also, "to overstep a boundary." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">矣夫</span>, as in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span></cite>, but the force here is more "ah!" than "alas!" <a href="chapter-6-25.xhtml#noteref-435" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-436" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius vindicates himself for visiting the unworthy <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Nan-tzŭ</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-6-26.xhtml#noteref-436" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-437" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Nan-tzŭ</span> was the wife of the duke of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, and half-sister of the prince <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chao</span>, mentioned in <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span></cite>. Her lewd character was well known, and hence <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-lu</span> was displeased, thinking an interview with her was disgraceful to the master. Great pains are taken to explain the incident. "<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Nan-tzŭ</span>," says one, "sought the interview from the stirrings of her natural conscience." "It was a rule," says another, "that stranger officers in a State should visit the prince's wife." "<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Nan-tzŭ</span>," argues a third, "had all influence with her husband, and Confucius wished to get currency by her means for his doctrine." Whether <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">矢</span> is to be understood in the sense of "to swear," = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">誓</span>, or "to make a declaration," = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">陳</span>, is much debated. Evidently the thing is an oath, or solemn protestation against the suspicions of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-lu</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">説</span>, as in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 1</cite>. <a href="chapter-6-26.xhtml#noteref-437" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-438" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The defective practice of the people in Confucius's time.</b> See the <cite><i epub:type="se.name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chung Yung</i></cite>. <a href="chapter-6-27.xhtml#noteref-438" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-439" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The true nature and art of virtue.</b> <a href="chapter-6-28.xhtml#noteref-439" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-440" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">施</span>, the 4th tone, "to confer benefits." <a href="chapter-6-28.xhtml#noteref-440" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-441" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">聖乎</span>,&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">乎</span> is said to be "a particle of doubt and uncertainty," but it is rather the interrogative affirmation of opinion. <a href="chapter-6-28.xhtml#noteref-441" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-442" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-kung</span> appears to have thought that great doings were necessary to virtue, and propounds a case which would transcend the achievements of the ancient model sovereigns <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yao</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shun</span>. From such extravagant views the Master recalls him <a href="chapter-6-28.xhtml#noteref-442" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-443" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the description of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仁者之心體</span>, "the mind of the perfectly virtuous man," as void of all selfishness. <a href="chapter-6-28.xhtml#noteref-443" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-444" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is to be wished that the idea intended by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">能者近取譬</span> had been more clearly expressed. Still we seem to have here a near approach to a positive enunciation of "the golden rule." <a href="chapter-6-28.xhtml#noteref-444" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-445" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Heading of this Book.</b>&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">述而第七</span>, "A transmitter, and&#8212;Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>." We have in this Book much information of a personal character about Confucius, both from his own lips and from the descriptions of his disciples. The two preceding Books treat of the disciples and other worthies, and here, in contrast with them, we have the sage himself exhibited. <a href="chapter-7-1.xhtml#noteref-445" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-446" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius disclaims being an originator or maker.</b><a href="chapter-7-1.xhtml#noteref-446" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-447" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">述</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">傳舊而已</span>, "simply to hand down the old." Commentators say the the Master's language here is from his extreme humility. But we must hold that it expresses his true sense of his position and work. Who the individual called endearingly "our old <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pʽêng</span> was, can hardly be ascertained. Some make <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">老彭</span> to be <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao-tzŭ</span>, the founder of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> sect, and the other that <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">彭祖</span>, of whom we read much in <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang-tzŭ</i></cite>. A <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pʽêng Hsien</span> appears in the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Sao</i>, <abbr>st.</abbr> 21</cite>, where <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> describes him as a worthy of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yin</span> (or <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shang</span>) dynasty, and he supposes him to the the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao Pʽêng</span> here. <a href="chapter-7-1.xhtml#noteref-447" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-448" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius's humble estimate of himself.</b> <a href="chapter-7-2.xhtml#noteref-448" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-449" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">識</span>, here by most scholars read <i xml:lang="zh-Hant">chih</i>, 4th tone, "to remember." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> refers, it is said, to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">理</span>, "principles," the subjects of the silent observation and reflection. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">何有於我哉</span>, cannot be,&#8212;"what difficulty do these occasion me?" but = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">何者能有於我</span>, as in the translation. "The language," says <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>, "is that of humility upon humility." Some insert, in their explanation, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">此外</span> before <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">何</span>&#8212;"Besides these, what is there in me?" But this is quite arbitrary. The profession may be inconsistent with what we find in other passage, but the in consistency must stand rather than violence be done to the language. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</span> gives the singular exposition of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鄭康成</span> (about <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 150&#8211;200)&#8212;"Other men have not these things, I only have them." <a href="chapter-7-2.xhtml#noteref-449" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-450" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius's anxiety about his self-cultivation:&#8212;Another humble estimate of himself.</b> <a href="chapter-7-3.xhtml#noteref-450" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-451" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here again commentators find only the expressions of humility, but there can be no reason why we should not admit that Confucius was anxious lest these things, which are only put forth as possibilities, should become in his case actual facts. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">講</span> is in the sense explained in this dictionary by the terms <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">習</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">究</span>, "practising," "examining." <a href="chapter-7-3.xhtml#noteref-451" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-452" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The manner of Confucius when unoccupied.</b> <a href="chapter-7-4.xhtml#noteref-452" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-453" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first clause, which is the subject of the other two, is literally&#8212;"The Master's dwelling at ease." Observe <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">燕</span>, in the 4th tone; <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">夭</span>, in the 1st; <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">如</span>, as in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-7-4.xhtml#noteref-453" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-454" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How this disappointment of Confucius's hopes affected even his dreams.</b> <a href="chapter-7-5.xhtml#noteref-454" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-455" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">周公</span> is now to all intents a proper name, but the characters mean "the duck of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> was the name of the seat of the family from which the dynasty so called sprang, and, on the enlargement of this territory, king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span> divided the original seat between his son <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">旦</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tan</span>) and the minister <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">奭</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih</span>). <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tan</span> was <em><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou-kung</span></em>, in wisdom and politics, what his elder brother, the first sovereign, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>, was in arms. Confucius had longed to bring the principles and institutions of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou-kung</span> into practice, and in his earlier years, while hope animated him, had often dreamt of the former sage. The original territory of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> was what is now the district of Qishan (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">岐山</span>), department of Fengxiang in Shaanxi. <a href="chapter-7-5.xhtml#noteref-455" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-456" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Rules for the full maturing of character.</b> <a href="chapter-7-6.xhtml#noteref-456" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-457" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">德</span> might be translated virtue, but <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仁</span> = "perfect virtue" following, we require another term. <a href="chapter-7-6.xhtml#noteref-457" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-458" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">游</span>, "to ramble for amusement," here = "to seek recreation." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">藝</span>, see note on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">文</span>, in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span></cite>. A full enumeration makes "six arts," <abbr>viz.</abbr> ceremonies, music, archery, charioteering, the study of characters or language, and figures or arithmetic. The ceremonies were ranged in five classes: lucky or sacrifices; unlucky or those of mourning; military; those of host and guest; and festive. Music required the study of the music of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huang-ti</span>, of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yao</span>, of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shun</span>, of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shun</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span>, and of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>. Archery had a fivefold classification. Charioteering had the same. The study of the characters required the examination of them to determine whether there predominated in their formation resemblance to the object, combination of ideas, indication of properties, a phonetic principles, a principles of contrariety, or metaphorical accommodation. Figures were managed according to nine rules, as the object was the measurement of land, capacity, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> These six subjects were the business of the highest and most liberal education, but we need not suppose that Confucius had them all in view here. <a href="chapter-7-6.xhtml#noteref-458" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-459" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The readiness of Confucius to impart instruction.</b> <a href="chapter-7-7.xhtml#noteref-459" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-460" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was the rule anciently that when one party waited on another, he should carry some present or offering with him. Pupils did so when they first waited on their teacher. Of such offerings, one of the lowest was a bundle of strips of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">脩</span>, "dried flesh." The wages of a teacher are now called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">脩金</span>, "the money of the dried flesh." However small the offering brought to the sage, let him only see the indication of a wish to learn, and he imparted his instructions. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">以上</span> may be translated "upward," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> "to such a man and others with larger gifts," <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">上</span> being in the 3rd tone; or the character may be understood in the sense of "coming to my instructions." I prefer the former interpretation. <a href="chapter-7-7.xhtml#noteref-460" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-461" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius required a real desire and ability in his disciples.</b> <a href="chapter-7-8.xhtml#noteref-461" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-462" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The last chapter tells of the sage's readiness to teach; this shows that he did not teach where his teaching was likely to prove of no avail. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">悱</span>, in the <abbr>comm.</abbr> and <abbr>dict.</abbr>, is explained <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">口欲言而未能之貌</span>, "the appearance of one with mouth wishing to speak and yet not able to do so." This being the meaning, we might have expected the character to be <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">啡</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">反</span>, "to turn," is explained <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">還以相證之義</span>, "going round for mutual testimony." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不復</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不復有所告</span>, "I tell him nothing more." <a href="chapter-7-8.xhtml#noteref-462" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-463" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius's sympathy with mourners.</b> <a href="chapter-7-9.xhtml#noteref-463" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-464" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The weeping is understood to be on occasion of offering his condolences to a mourner, which was "a rule of propriety." <a href="chapter-7-9.xhtml#noteref-464" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-465" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The attainments of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui</span> like those of Confucius. The excessive boldness of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-lu</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-7-10.xhtml#noteref-465" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-466" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">用之</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">舍之</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> is explained by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">我</span>, but we have seen that <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> following active verbs imparts to them a sort of neuter signification. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">用之</span> = "used." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">舍之</span> = "neglected." <a href="chapter-7-10.xhtml#noteref-466" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-467" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chün</i>, according to the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">周禮</span>, consisted of 12,500 men. The royal forces consisted of six such bodies, and those of a great State of three. <a href="chapter-7-10.xhtml#noteref-467" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-468" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">暴虎馮河</span>, see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 1 <abbr>st.</abbr> 6. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">懼</span> does not indicate <em>timidity</em>, but <em>solicitude</em>.&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-lu</span>, it would appear, was jealous of the praise conferred on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui</span>, and, pluming himself on his bravery, put in for a share of the Master's approbation. But he only brought on himself this rebuke. <a href="chapter-7-10.xhtml#noteref-468" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-469" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The uncertainty and folly of the pursuit of riches.</b> <a href="chapter-7-11.xhtml#noteref-469" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-470" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It occurs to a student to understand the first clause&#8212;"If it be <em>proper</em> to search for riches," and the third&#8212;"I will do it." But the translation is according to the modern commentaries, and the conclusion agrees better with it. In explaining <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">執鞭之士</span>, some refer us to the attendants who cleared the street with their whips when the prince went abroad, but we need not seek any particular allusion of the kind. Observe <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">若</span>, "if," and then <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">如</span> = "since." Still we may bring out the meaning from <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而</span> taken in its usual significance of "<em>and</em>." In this construction the previous <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">富</span> = "given riches," and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而可求</span> = "and such as can surely be found."&#8212;An objection to the pursuit of wealth may be made on the ground of righteousness, or on that of its uncertainty. It is the latter on which Confucius here rests. <a href="chapter-7-11.xhtml#noteref-470" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-471" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>What things Confucius was particularly careful about.</b> <a href="chapter-7-12.xhtml#noteref-471" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-472" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">齊</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chai</i>, and = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">齋</span>, "to fast," or, rather, denoting the whole religious adjustment, enjoined before the offering of sacrifice, and extending over the ten days previous to the great sacrificial seasons. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">齊</span> means "to equalize" (see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span></cite>), and the effect of those previous exercises was <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">齊不齊以致齊</span>, "to adjust what was not adjusted, so as to produce a perfect adjustment." Sacrifices presented in such a state of mind were sure to e acceptable. Other people, it is said, might be heedless in reference to sacrifice, to war, and to sickness, but not so the sage. <a href="chapter-7-12.xhtml#noteref-472" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-473" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The effect of music on Confucius.</b> <a href="chapter-7-13.xhtml#noteref-473" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-474" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shao</i>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span></cite>. This incident must have happened in the thirty-sixth year of Confucius, when he followed the duke <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chao</span> in his flight from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>. As related in the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">史記</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historical Records</i>, before the characters <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">三月</span>, we have <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">學之</span>, "he learned it three months," which may relieve us form the necessity of extending the three months over all the time in which he did not know the taste of his food. In <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen's</span> compilation, the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不知</span> is explained by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">忽忘</span>, "he was careless about and forgot." The last clause is also explained there&#8212;"I did not think that this music had reached this country of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>." <a href="chapter-7-13.xhtml#noteref-474" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-475" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius did not approve of a son opposing his father.</b> <a href="chapter7-14.xhtml#noteref-475" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-476" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The eldest so of duke <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ling</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> had planned to kill his mother (? stepmother), the notorious <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Nan-tzŭ</span> (<cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span></cite>). For this he had to flee the country, and his son, on the death of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ling</span>, became duke (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">出公</span>), and subsequently oppose his father's attempts to wrest the State from him. This was the matter argued among the disciples,&#8212;Was Confucius for (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲</span>, 4th tone) the son, the ruling duke? <a href="chapter-7-14.xhtml#noteref-476" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-477" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> it would not have been according to <em>propriety</em> to speak by name of its ruler, and therefore <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzŭ-kung</span> put the case of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po-i</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-chʽi</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span></cite>. They have given up a throne, and finally their lives, rather than do what they thought wrong, and Confucius fully approving of their conduct, it was plain he could not approve of a son's holding by force what was the rightful inheritance of the father. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">求仁而得仁</span>, "They sought for virtue, and they got virtue;" <abbr>i.e.</abbr> such was the character of their conduct. <a href="chapter-7-14.xhtml#noteref-477" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-478" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The joy of COnfucius independent of outward circumstances.</b> <a href="chapter-7-15.xhtml#noteref-478" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-479" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">飯</span>, in 3rd tone, "a meal;" also, as here, a verb, "to eat." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">枕</span>, 4th tone, "to pillow," "to use as a pillow." Critics call attention to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">亦</span>, making the sentiment = "My joy is everywhere. It is amid other circumstances. It is <em>also</em> here." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不義云云</span>, = "By unrighteousness I might get riches and honours, but such riches and honours are to me as a floating cloud. It is vain to grasp at them, so uncertain and unsubstantial." <a href="chapter-7-15.xhtml#noteref-479" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-480" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The value which Confucius set upon the study of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi</i>.</b> <a href="chapter-7-16.xhtml#noteref-480" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-481" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> supposes that this was spoken when Confucius was about seventy, as he was in his sixty-eighth year when he ceased his wanderings, and settled in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> to the adjustment and compilation of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi</i> and other <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ching</i>. If the remark be referred to that time, an error may well be found in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">五十</span>, for he would hardly be speaking at seventy of having fifty years added to his life. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu</span> also mentions the report of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Pʽing-chün</span>, referred to by him under <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span></cite>, that he had been told of a copy of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yü</i>, which read <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">假</span> for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">加</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">卒</span> for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">五十</span>. Amended thus, the meaning would be&#8212;"If I had some <em>more</em> years to finish the study of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi</i>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>" <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</span> interprets the chapter quite differently. Referring to the saying, <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 4</cite>, "At fifty, I knew the decree of Heaven," he supposes this to have been spoken when Confucius was forty-seven, and explains&#8212;"In a few years more I will be fifty, and have finished the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi</i>, when I may be without great faults."&#8212;One thing remains upon both views:&#8212;Confucius never claimed, what his followers do for him, to be a perfect man. <a href="chapter-7-16.xhtml#noteref-481" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-482" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius's most common topics.</b> <a href="chapter-7-17.xhtml#noteref-482" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-483" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">書</span>, "The History," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> the historical documents which were compiled into the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-ching</i> that has come down to us in a mutilated condition. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">詩</span> also, and much more <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">禮</span>, must not be understood of the now existing <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Chi</i>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> explains <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">雅</span> (3rd tone) by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">常</span>, "constantly." The old interpreter <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng</span> explains it by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">正</span>, "correctly,"&#8212;"Confucius would speak of the Odes, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, with attention to the correct enunciation of the characters." This does not seem so good. <a href="chapter-7-17.xhtml#noteref-483" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-484" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius's description of his own character, as being simply a cheerful, earnest learner.</b> <a href="chapter-7-18.xhtml#noteref-484" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-485" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">葉</span> (read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shê</i>) was a district of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">楚</span>), the governor or prefect of which was styled <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">kung</i>, after the usurping fashion of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span>. Its name is still preserved in a district of the department of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">南陽</span>, in the south of Henan. <a href="chapter-7-18.xhtml#noteref-485" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-486" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">云</span> sometimes finishes a sentence (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Prémare</i>, <i xml:lang="la">claudit orationem</i>), as here. The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爾</span> after it <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">耳</span>, imparting to all the preceding description a meaning indicated by our <em>simply</em> or <em>only</em>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Yin-chih</span>, in his treatise on the particles, gives instances of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">云</span> used as a particle, now initial, now medial, and again final. <a href="chapter-7-18.xhtml#noteref-486" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-487" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius's knowledge not connate, but the result of his study of antiquity.</b> <a href="chapter-7-19.xhtml#noteref-487" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-488" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here again, according to the commentators, is a wonderful instance of the sage's humility disclaiming what he really had. The comment of a <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yin</span>, subjoined to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi's</span> own, is to the effect that the knownledge born with a man is only <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">義</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">理</span>, while ceremonies, music, names of things, history, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, must be learned. This would make what we may call connate or innate knowledge the moral sense, and those intuitive principles of reason, on and by which all knowledge is built up. But Confucius could not mean to deny his being possessed of these. "I love antiquity;" <abbr>i.e.</abbr> the ancients and all their works. <a href="chapter-7-19.xhtml#noteref-488" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-489" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Subjects avoided by Confucius in his conversation.</b> <a href="chapter-7-20.xhtml#noteref-489" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-490" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">亂</span>, "confusion," meaning rebellious disorder, parricide, regicide, and such crimes. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> makes <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">神</span> here = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鬼神造化之迹</span>, "the mysterious, or spiritual operations apparent in the course of nature." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">王肅</span> (died <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 266), as given by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</span>, simply says&#8212;<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鬼神之事</span>, "the affairs of spiritual beings." For an instance of Confucius avoiding such a subject, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-7-20.xhtml#noteref-490" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-491" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How a man may find instructors for himself.</b> <a href="chapter-7-21.xhtml#noteref-491" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-492" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">三人行</span>, "three men walking;" but it is implied that the speaker is himself one of them. The commentators all take <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">擇</span> in the sense of "to distinguish," "to determine."—"I will determine the one who is good, and follow him, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>" I prefer to understand as in the translation. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">改之</span>, "change them," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> correct them in myself, avoid them. <a href="chapter-7-21.xhtml#noteref-492" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-493" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius calm in danger, through the assurance of having a divine mission.</b> <a href="chapter-7-22.xhtml#noteref-493" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-494" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to the historical accounts, Confucius was passing through <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span> in his way from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên</span>, and was practising ceremonies with his disciples under a large tree, when they were set upon by emissary of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huan</span> (or <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiang</span>) <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽui</span>, a high officer of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span>. These pulled down the tree, and wanted to kill the sage. His disciples urged him to make haste and escape, when he calmed their fears by these words. At the same time, he disguised himself till he had got past <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span>. This story may be apocryphal, but the saying remains,—a remarkable one. <a href="chapter-7-22.xhtml#noteref-494" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-495" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius practised no concealment with his disciples.</b> <a href="chapter-7-23.xhtml#noteref-495" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-496" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">二三子</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span></cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span> is explained by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">示</span>, "to show," as if the meaning were, "There is not one of my doings in which I am not showing my doctrines to you." But the common signification of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span> may be retained, as in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</span>—"which is not given to, shared with, you." To what the concealment has reference we cannot tell. Observe the force of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">者</span> followed by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也</span> at the end;—"To have none of my actions not shared with you,—<em>that</em> is I, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽiu</span>." <a href="chapter-7-23.xhtml#noteref-496" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-497" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The subjects of Confucius's Teachings.</b> <a href="chapter-7-24.xhtml#noteref-497" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-498" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">以四教</span>, "took four thing and taught." There were four things which—not four ways in which—Confucius taught. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">文</span> here = our use of <em>letters</em>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">行</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">人倫日用</span>, "what is daily used in the relations of life." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">忠</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">無一念之不盡</span>, "not a single thought not exhausted." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">信</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">無一事之不實</span>, "not a single thing without its reality." These are the explanations in the <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書備旨</span></cite>. I confess to apprehend but vaguely the two latter subjects as distinguished from the second. <a href="chapter-7-24.xhtml#noteref-498" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-499" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The paucity of true men in, and the pretentiousness of, Confucius's time.</b> <a href="chapter-7-25.xhtml#noteref-499" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-500" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子曰</span>, <abbr>par.</abbr> 2, is supposed by some to be an addition to the text. This being so, we have in the chapter a climax of character:—the man of constancy, or the single-hearted, tasted man; the good man, who on his single-heartedness has built up his virtue; the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chün-tzû</i>, the man of virtue in large proportions, and intellectually able besides; and the sage, or highest style of man. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">聖</span>, from <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">耳</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">口</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">壬</span>, "ear, mouth, and good," = intuitively apprehensive of truth, and correct in utterance and action. <abbr>Comp.</abbr> <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mencius</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <abbr>Pt.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-7-25.xhtml#noteref-500" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-501" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The humanity of Confucius.</b> <a href="chapter-7-26.xhtml#noteref-501" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-502" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">綱</span> is properly the large rope attached to a net, by means of which it may be drawn so as to sweep a stream. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">弋</span>, "to shoot with a string tiled to the arrow, by which it may be drawn back again." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">射</span>, applied to such shooting, in the 4th tone, is read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shih</i>. COnfucius would only destroy what life was necessary for his use, and in taking that he would not take advantage of the inferior creatures. This chapter is said to be descriptive of him in his early life. <a href="chapter-7-26.xhtml#noteref-502" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-503" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Against acting heedlessly.</b> <a href="chapter-7-27.xhtml#noteref-503" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-504" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pao Hsien</span>, in <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</i></cite>, says that this was spoken with reference to heedless compilers of records. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">Chu Hsi</span> makes <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">作之</span> simply = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">作事</span>, "to do things," "to act." The paraphrasts make the latter part descriptive of Confucius—"I hear much, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>" This is not necessary, and the translation had better be as indefinite as the original. <a href="chapter-7-27.xhtml#noteref-504" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-505" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The readiness of Confucius to meet approaches to him though made by the unlikely.</b> <a href="chapter-7-28.xhtml#noteref-505" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-506" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">互鄉</span>, the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鄉</span> appears to be like our local termination <em>ham</em>.—"The people of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hu-</span>ham." Its site is now sought in three different places. <a href="chapter-7-28.xhtml#noteref-506" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-507" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> would have transpose the order of the text, and read <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">人潔己云云</span> immediately after <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子曰</span>. He also supposes some characters lost in the sentence <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">唯何甚</span>. This is hardly necessary. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span>, as in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 3</cite>, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">許</span>, "to allow," "to concede to." <a href="chapter-7-28.xhtml#noteref-507" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-508" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Virtue is not far to seek.</b> <a href="chapter-7-29.xhtml#noteref-508" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-509" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">哉</span>, after <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">乎</span>, implies the negative answer to be given. <a href="chapter-7-29.xhtml#noteref-509" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-510" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How Confucius acknowledged his error.</b> <a href="chapter-7-30.xhtml#noteref-510" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-511" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên</span>, one of the States of China in Confucius's time, is to be referred probably to the present department of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên-chou</span> in Henan province. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">司敗</span> was the name given in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span> to the minister elsewhere called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">司寇</span>, which terms Morrison and Medhurst translate—"criminal judge." But <em>judge</em> does not come up to his functions, which were legislative as well as executive. He was the adviser of his sovereign on all matters relating to crime. See the <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">周禮, 秋官司寇</span></cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chao</span> was the honorary epithet of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽou</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">稠</span>), duke of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 541–509. He had a reputation for the knowledge and observance of ceremonies, and Confucius answered the minister's question accordingly, the more readily that he was speaking to the officer of another State, and was bound, therefore, to hide any failings that his own sovereign might have had. <a href="chapter-7-30.xhtml#noteref-511" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-512" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With all his knowledge of proprieties, the duke <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chao</span> had violated an important rule,—that which forbids the intermarriage of parties of the same surname. The ruling houses of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> were branches of the imperial house of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>, and consequently had the same surname—<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">姬</span>). To conceal his violation of the rule, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chao</span> called his wife by the surname <em><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzû</span></em> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子</span>), as if she had belonged to the ducal house of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">取</span>, the 4th tone = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">娶</span>. <a href="chapter-7-30.xhtml#noteref-512" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-513" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Confucius takes the criticism of his questioner very lightly. <a href="chapter-7-30.xhtml#noteref-513" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-514" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The good fellowship of Confucius.</b><a href="chapter-7-31.xhtml#noteref-514" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-515" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On this chapter, see the <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">四書合講</span></cite>, which states very distinctly the interpretation which I have followed, making only two singings and not three. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">和</span>, 4th tone, here = "to sing in unison with." <a href="chapter-7-31.xhtml#noteref-515" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-516" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Acknowledgment of Confucius in estimating himself.</b><a href="chapter-7-32.xhtml#noteref-516" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-517" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">莫</span> here occasions some difficulty. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</span> takes it, as it often is, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">無</span>, and explains, "I am not better than others in letters." In the dictionary, with reference to this passage, it is explained by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">强</span>, so that the meaning would be—"By effort, I can equal other men in letters." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> makes it <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">疑辭</span>, a "particle of doubt," = "perhaps." But this is formed for the occasion. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">躬行君子</span>, "an in-person-acting <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chün-tzû</i>." <a href="chapter-7-32.xhtml#noteref-517" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-518" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>What Confucius declined to be considered, and what he claimed.</b><a href="chapter-7-33.xhtml#noteref-518" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-519" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">若</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">抑</span> are said to be correlative, in which case they = our "although" and "yet." More naturally, we may join <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">若</span> directly with <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">聖與仁</span>, and take <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">抑</span> as = our "but." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">云爾</span>, see <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span> 2</cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而矣</span>, added to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">云爾</span>, increases its emphasis, = "just this and nothing more." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-hsi Hua</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 4</cite>. <a href="chapter-7-33.xhtml#noteref-519" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-520" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius declines to be prayed for.</b><a href="chapter-7-34.xhtml#noteref-520" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-521" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">疾病</span> together mean "very sick." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">有諸</span>;—<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">諸</span> is interrogative, as we find it frequently in <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mencius</i></cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">誄</span>, "to write a eulogy, and confer the posthumous honorary title;" also, "to eulogise in prayer," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> to recite one's excellences as the ground of supplication. <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lei</i> is a special from of conposition corresponding to the French <i xml:lang="fr">éloge</i>, specimens of which are to be found in the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên Hsüan</i> (<span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">文選</span>)</cite>, of prince <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiao Tʽung</span>. Wylie, <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes on Chinese Literature</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 192</cite>, calls them "obituaries." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzû-lu</span> must have been referring to some well-known collection of such compositions. In <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">禱爾</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爾</span> may be taken as the pronoun. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">上下</span> = heaven and earth, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">神</span> being the appropriate designation of the spirits of the former, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">衹</span> of the latter.—<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> says, "Prayer is the expression of repentance and promise of amendment, to supplicate the help of the spirits. If there be not those things, then there is no need for praying. In the case of the sage, he had committed no errors, and admitted of no amendment. In all his conduct he had been in harmony with the spiritual intelligences, and there he said,—<em>my praying has been for a long time</em>." We must demur to some of these expressions; but the declining to be prayed for, and the concluding remark, seem to indicate the satisfaction of Confucius with himself. We wish that our information about him were not so stinted and fragmentary. <a href="chapter-7-34.xhtml#noteref-521" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-522" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Meanness not so bad as insubordination.</b><a href="chapter-7-35.xhtml#noteref-522" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-523" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孫</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">sun</i>, like <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">遜</span>, and with the same meaning. <a href="chapter-7-35.xhtml#noteref-523" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-524" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Contrast in their feelings between the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chün-tzû</i> and the mean man.</b><a href="chapter-7-36.xhtml#noteref-524" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-525" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">坦</span>, "a level plain," used adverbially with <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">然</span>, = "lightsomely." This is its force here. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">長</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">常時</span>, "constantly." <a href="chapter-7-36.xhtml#noteref-525" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-526" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How various elements modified one another in the character of Confucius.</b><a href="chapter-7-37.xhtml#noteref-526" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-527" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The heading of this book.</b>—<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">泰伯第八</span>, "<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai-Po</span>, 'Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>.'" As in other cases, the first words of the Book give the name to it. The subjects of the chapter are miscellaneous, but it begins and ends with the character and deeds of ancient sages and worthies, and on this account it follows the seventh chapter, where we have Confucius himself described. <a href="book-8.xhtml#noteref-527" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-528" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The exceeding virtue of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai-po</span></b> <a href="chapter-8-1.xhtml#noteref-528" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-529" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai-po</span> was the eldest son of king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">太</span>), the grandfather of of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span>, the founder of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> dynasty. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai</span> had formed the intention of upsetting the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yin</span> dynasty, of which <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai-po</span> disapproved. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai</span> moreover, because of the sage virtues of his grandson <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽang</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">昌</span>), who afterwards, became king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span>, wished to hand down his principality to his third son, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽang's</span> father. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai-po</span> observing this, and to escape opposing his father's purpose, retired with his second brother among the barbarous tribes of the south, and left their youngest brother in possession of the State. The motives of his conduct <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai-po</span> kept to himself, so that the people <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不得而稱之</span>, "could not find how to praise him." THere is a difficulty in making out the refusal of the empire <em>three</em> times, there being different accounts of the times and ways in which he did so. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> cuts the knot, by making "thrice" = "firmly," in which solution we may acquiesce. There is as great difficulty to find out a declining of the kingdom in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai-po's</span> withdrawing from the petter State of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>. It may be added that king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>, the first sovereign of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chau</span> dynasty, subsequently conferred on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai-po</span> the posthumous title of Chief of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">吳</span>), the country to which he had withdrawn, and whose rude inhabitants gathered round him. His second brother succeeded him in the government of them, and hence the ruling house of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> had the same surname as the royal house of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>, that namely of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">姬</span>);—see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span></cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也已矣</span> give emphasis to the preceeding declaration;—compare <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span></cite>. <a href="chapter8-1.xhtml#noteref-529" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-530" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The value of the rules of propriety; and of example in those in high stations.</b> <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-530" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-531" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We must bear in mind that the ceremonies, or rules of propriety, spoken of in these Books, are not mere conventionalities, but the ordinations of man's moral and intelligent nature in the line of what is <em>priper</em>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">絞</span>, "to strange," is here explained by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">急切</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</span>, after <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ma Jung</span> (early part of 2nd century), makes it = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">絞刺</span>, "sarcasm." <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-531" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-532" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There does not seem any connection between the former paragraph and this, and hence this is by many considered to be a new chapter, and assigned to the philosopher <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">君子</span> differs here from its previous usage, having reference more to the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">位</span> or station of the individuals indicated, than to their <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">德</span> or virtue. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">故舊</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">舊臣舊交</span>, "old ministers and old intimacies." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">偷</span>, often a verb, "to steal;" here an adjective, "mean." <a href="chapter-8-2.xhtml#noteref-532" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-533" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The philosopher <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng's</span> filial piety seen in his care of his person.</b> <a href="chapter-8-3.xhtml#noteref-533" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-534" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We get our bodies perfect from our parents, and should so perserve them to the last. This is a great branch of filial piety with the Chinese, and this chapter is said to illustrate how <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng-tzû</span> (<cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span></cite>) had made this his life-long study. He made the disciples uncover his hands and feet to show them in what preservavtion those members were. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">詩云</span>,—see the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr>st.</abbr> 6</cite>. In <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而今</span>, we must take <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">自</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Yin-chih</span>, however, takes the first <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而</span> as = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">乃</span>, and adduces other instances of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">乃</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而</span>. Still the usage is remarkable. <a href="chapter-8-3.xhtml#noteref-534" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-535" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The philosopher <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng's</span> dying counsels to a man of high rank.</b> <a href="chapter-8-4.xhtml#noteref-535" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-536" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">敬</span> was the honorary epithet of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仲孫捷</span>, a great officer of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, and son of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng-wu</span> <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span></cite>. From the conclusion of this chapter, we may suppose that he descended to small matters below his rank. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> refers to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">疾</span>. <a href="chapter-8-4.xhtml#noteref-536" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-537" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">言</span>, in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">曾子言曰</span>, intimates that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng</span> commenced the conversation. <a href="chapter-8-4.xhtml#noteref-537" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-538" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">動</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">正</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">出</span> are all = verbs governing the nouns following. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">倍</span> is read like <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">背</span>, and with the same meaning, "to rebel against," "to be contrary to," that here opposed being <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">道</span>, "the truth and right." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">籩</span> was a bamboo dish with a stand, made to hold fruits and seeds at sacrifice; <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">豆</span> was like it, and of the same size, only made of wood, and used to contain pickled vegetables and sauces. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">君子</span> is used as in <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span></cite>.—In <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen's</span> compilation, the three clauses, beginning <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">斯遠</span>, are taken not so well, and = "thus he will not suffer from men's being violent and insulting, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-8-4.xhtml#noteref-538" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-541" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>A combination of talents and virtue constituting a <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chün-tzü</i>.</b> <a href="chapter-8-6.xhtml#noteref-541" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-542" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">六尺之孤</span>, "an orphan of six cubits." By a comparison of a passage in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou Li</i> and other references, it is established that "of six cubits" is equivalent to "of fifteen years or less," and that for every cubit more or less we should add or deduct five years. See the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">經註集證</i></cite>, where it is also said that the ancient cubit was shorter than the modern, and only = 7.4 <abbr>in.</abbr>, so that six cubits = 4.4 cubits of the present day. But this estimate of the ancient cubbit is probably still too high. King <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span>, it is said, was ten cubits high! <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">百里之命</span>, see <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mencius</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <abbr>Pt.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 6</cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span> amounts nearly to a question, and is answered by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也</span>,—"Yes, indeed." <a href="chapter-8-6.xhtml#noteref-542" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-543" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The necessity to the officer of compass and vigour of mind.</b> <a href="chapter-8-7.xhtml#noteref-543" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-544" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">士</span>, a learned man, "a scholar;" but in all ages learning has been the qualification for, and passport to, official employment in China, hence it is also a general designation for "an officer." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">任</span>, 4th tone, a noun, = "an office," "a burden borne;" with the 2nd tone, it is a verb "to bear." <a href="chapter-8-7.xhtml#noteref-544" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-545" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The effects of poetry, proprieties, and music.</b> <a href="chapter-8-8.xhtml#noteref-545" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-546" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These three short sentences are in form like the four, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">志於道</span>, <abbr>etc.</abbr> in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span></cite>, but must be interpreted differently. There the first term in each sentence is a verb in the imperative mood; here it is rather in the indicative. There the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">於</span> is to be joined closely to the 1st character and here to the 3rd. There it = our preposition <em>to</em>; here it = <em>by</em>. The terms <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">詩</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">禮</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">樂</span> have all specific reference to the Books so called. <a href="chapter-8-8.xhtml#noteref-546" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-547" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>What may, and what may not be attained to with the people</b> <a href="chapter-8-9.xhtml#noteref-547" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-548" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>, the first <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> is <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">理之所以然</span>, "the <em>principle</em> of duty." He also takes <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">可</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不可</span> as = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">能</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不能</span>. If the meaning were so, then the sentiment would be much too broadly expressed. See <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書改錯</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span></cite>. As often in other places, the <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">翼註</span></cite> gives the meaning here happily; <abbr>viz.</abbr> that a knowledge of the reasons and principles of what they are called to do need not be required from the people,—<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不可貴之民</span>. <a href="chapter-8-9.xhtml#noteref-548" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-549" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Different causes of insubordination;—a lesson to rulers.</b> <a href="chapter-8-10.xhtml#noteref-549" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-550" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The worthiness of talent without virtue.</b> <a href="chapter-8-11.xhtml#noteref-550" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-551" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"The duke of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>;"—see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span></cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其餘</span>, "the overplus," "the superfluity," referring to the "talents," and indicating that ability is not the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">本</span>, or root of character, not what is essential. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也已</span>, as in <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-8-11.xhtml#noteref-551" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-552" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How quickly learning makes men good.</b> <a href="chapter-8-12.xhtml#noteref-552" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-553" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the interpretation of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung An-kuo</span>, who takes <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">穀</span> in the sense of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">善</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> takes the term in the sense of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">祿</span>, "emolument," and would change <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">至</span> into <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">志</span>, making the whole a lamentation over the rarity of the disinterested pursuit of learning. But we are not at liberty to admit alterations of the text, unless, as received, it be absolutely unintelligible. <a href="chapter-8-12.xhtml#noteref-553" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-554" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The qualification of an officer, who will always act right in accepting and declining office.</b> <a href="chapter-8-13.xhtml#noteref-554" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-555" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This paragraph is taken as descriptive of character, the effects of whose presence we have in the neext, and of its absence in the last. <a href="chapter-8-13.xhtml#noteref-555" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-556" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">見</span> in opposition to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">隱</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">hsien</i>, in 4th tone. The whole chapter seems to want the warmth of generous principle and feeling. In fact, I doubt whether its parts bear the relation and connection which they are supposed to have. <a href="chapter-8-13.xhtml#noteref-556" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-557" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Every man should mind his own business.</b> <a href="chapter-8-14.xhtml#noteref-557" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-558" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>So the sentiment of this chapter is generalized by the paraphrasts, and perhaps correctly. Its letter, however, has doubtless operated to prevent the spread of right notions about political liberty in China. <a href="chapter-8-14.xhtml#noteref-558" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-559" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The praise of the music-master <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chih</span></b>. <a href="chapter-8-15.xhtml#noteref-559" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-560" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Neither Morrison nor Medhurst gives what appears to be the meaning of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">亂</span> in this chapter. The <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-hsi dictionary</i></cite> has it—<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">樂之卒章曰亂</span>, "The last part in the musical services is called <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">luan</i>." The programme on those occasions consisted of four parts, in the last of which a number of pieces from the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">fêng</i> or songs of the States was sung, commencing with the <em><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kuan Chü</span></em>. The name <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">luan</i> was also given to a sort of refrain, at the end of each song.—The old interpreters explain differently,—"when the music-master <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chih</span> first corrected the confusion of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kuan Chü</span>," <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-8-15.xhtml#noteref-560" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-561" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>A lamentation over moral errors added to natural defect.</b> <a href="chapter-8-16.xhtml#noteref-561" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-562" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">吾不知之</span>, "I do not know them;" that is, say commentators, natural defects of endowment are generally associated with certain redeeming qualities, as hestiness with straightforwardness, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, but in the parties Confucius had in view, those redeeming qualities were absent. he did not understand them, and could do nothing for them. <a href="chapter-5-16.xhtml#noteref-562" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-563" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>With what earnestness and continuousness learning should be pursued.</b> <a href="chapter-8-17.xhtml#noteref-563" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-564" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The lofty character of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shun</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yü</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-8-18.xhtml#noteref-564" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-565" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shun</span> receive from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yao</span>, <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 2205, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yü</span> received it from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shun</span>, <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>. Th throne came to them not by inheritance. They were called to it through their talents and virtue. And yet the possession of it did not affect them at all. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不與</span>,—"it did not concern them," was as if nothing to them. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</span> takes <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">求</span>,—"they had the empire without seeking for it." This is not according to usage. <a href="chapter-8-18.xhtml#noteref-565" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-566" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The praise of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yao</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-8-19.xhtml#noteref-566" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-567" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No doubt, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yao</span>, as he appears in Chinese annals, is a fit object of admiration, but if Confucius had had a right knowledge of, and reverence for, Heaven, he could not have spoken as he does here. Grant that it is only the visible heaven overspreading all, to which he compares <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yao</span>, even that is sufficiently absurd. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">則之</span>, not simply = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">法之</span>, "imitated it," but <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">能與之準</span>, "could equalize with it." <a href="chapter-8-19.xhtml#noteref-567" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-568" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其有成功</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">其所有之成功</span>, "the great achievvements of his government. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">文章</span> (see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span></cite>.) = the music, ceremonies, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, of which he was the author. <a href="chapter-8-19.xhtml#noteref-568" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-569" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The scarcity of men of talent, and praise of the house of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-8-20.xhtml#noteref-569" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-570" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shun's</span> five ministers were <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">禹</span>, Superintendent of Works, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">稷</span>, Superintendent of Agriculture; <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">契</span> (<i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">hsieh</i>), Minister of Instruction; <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">皋陶</span>, Minister of Justice; and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">伯益</span>, Warden of Woods and Marshes. Those five, as being eminent above all their compeers, are mentioned. <a href="chapter-8-20.xhtml#noteref-570" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-571" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-ching</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>sect.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 6</cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">亂臣</span>, "governing, <abbr>i.e.</abbr> able ministers." In the dictionary, the first meaning given of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">亂</span> is "to regulate," and the second is just the opposite,—"to confound," "confusion." Of the ten ministers, the most distinguished of course was the duke of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>. One of them, it is said next paragraph, was a woman, but whether she was the mother of king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span>, or his wife, is much disputed. The ten men were:—the duke of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>, the duke of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shao</span>, Grandfather Hope, the duke of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pi</span>, the duke of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jung</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽai-tien</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hung-yao</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">San-i Shêng</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Nan-kung Kʽuo</span>, and the wife or mother of king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span>. <a href="chapter-8-20.xhtml#noteref-571" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-572" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Instead of the usual (The Master said," we have here <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孔子曰</span>, "The philosopher <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung</span> said." This is accounted for on the ground that the words of <em>king</em> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> having been quoted immediately before, it would not have been right to crown the sage with his usual title of "the <em>Master</em>." The style of the whole chapter, however, is different from that of any previous one, and we may suspect that it is corrupt. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">才難</span> is a sort of proverb, or common saying, which Confucius quotes and illustrates. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">唐虞之際</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yao</span> is called <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span>, having ascended the throne from the marquisate of that name, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yü</span> became a sort of accepted surname or style of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shun</span>) <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">於斯爲盛</span> is understood by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> as in the translation, while the old writers take exactly the opposite view. The whole is obscure. <a href="chapter-8-20.xhtml#noteref-572" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-573" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This paragraph must be spoken of king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span>. <a href="chapter-8-20.xhtml#noteref-573" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-573" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The praise of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yü</span>.</b> <a href="chapter-8-21.xhtml#noteref-573" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-574" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">閒</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chien</i>, 4th tone, "a crevice," "a crack." The form <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">間</span> in the text is not so correct. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">禹吾無閒然矣</span>, "<em>In</em> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yü</span>, <em>I find</em> no crevice so," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> I find nothing in him to which I can point as a flaw. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鬼神</span> is interpreted of the spirits of heaven and earth, as well as those sacrificed to in the ancestral temple, but the saying that the rich offerings were filial (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孝</span>) would seem to restrict the phrase to the latter. The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">黻</span> was an apron made of leather, and coming down over the knees, and the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">冕</span> was a sort of cap or crown, flat on the top, and projecting before and behind, with a long fringe on which gems and pearls were strung, exactly like the Christ-Church cap of Oxford. They were both used in sacrificing. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">溝洫</span>, generally the water-channels by which the boundaries of the fields were determined, and provision made for their irrigation, and to carry off the water of floods. The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">溝</span> were four cubits wide and deep, and arranged so as to flow into the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">洫</span>, which were double the size. <a href="chapter-8-21.xhtml#noteref-574" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-575" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Heading of this Book.</b>—<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子罕第九</span>, "The Master seldom, <abbr>No.</abbr> 9." The thirty chapters of this Book are much akin to those of the <cite>seventh</cite>. They are mostly occupied with the doctrine, character, and ways of Confucius himself. <a href="book-9.xhtml#noteref-575" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-576" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Subjects seldom spoken of by Confucius.</b> <a href="chapter-9-1.xhtml#noteref-576" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-577" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">利</span> is mostly taken here in a good sense, not as selfish gain, but as it is defined under the first of the diagrams in the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi-ching</i></cite>,—<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">義之和</span>, "the harmoniousness of all that is righteous;" that is, how what is right is really what is truly profitable. Compare <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mencius</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 1</cite>. Yet even in this sense COnfucius seldom spoke of it, as he would not have the consideration of the profitable introduced into conduct at all. With his not speaking of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仁</span> there is a difficulty which I know not how to solve. The <cite>fourth Book</cite> is nearly all occupied with it, and no doubt it was a prominent topic in Confucius's teachings. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">命</span> is not = our <em>fate</em>, unless in the primary meaning of that term,—"<i xml:lang="la">Fatum est quod dii fantur.</i>" Nor is it <em>decree</em>, or antecedent purpose and determination, but the decree embodied and realised in its object. <a href="chapter-9-1.xhtml#noteref-577" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-578" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Amusement of Confucius at the remark of an ignorant man about him.</b> Commentators, old and new, say theat the chapter shows the exceeding humility of the sage, educed by his being praised, but his observation on the man's remark was evidently ironical. <a href="chapter-9-2.xhtml#noteref-578" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-579" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For want of another word, I render <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">黨</span> by "village." According to the statutes of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>, "five families made a <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">比</span>, four <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">pi</i> a <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">閭</span>, and five <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">lü</i> or 500 families a <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">tang</i>." Who the villager was is not receorded, though some would have him to be the same with <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">項槖</span>, the boy of whom it is said in the <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">三字經</span></cite>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">昔仲尼師項槖</span>, "of old Confucius was a scholar of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiang Tʽo</span>." The man was able to see that Confucius was very extensively learned, but his idea of fame, common to the age, was that it must be acquired by excellence in some one particular art. In his lips, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孔子</span> was not more than our "<abbr>Mr.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung</span>." <a href="chapter-9-2.xhtml#noteref-579" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-580" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Some common practices indifferent and others not.</b> <a href="chapter-9-3.xhtml#noteref-580" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-581" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The cap here spoken of was that prescribed to be worn in the ancestral temple, and made of very fine linen dyed of a deep dark colour. It had fallen into disuse, and was superseded by a simpler one of silk. Rather than be singular, Confucius gave in to a practice, which involved no principle of right, and was economical. <a href="chapter-9-3.xhtml#noteref-581" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-582" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> explains the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">拜下, 拜乎上</span>, thus: "In the ceremonial intercourse between ministers and their prince, it was proper for them to bow below the raised hall. This the prince declined, on which they ascended and completed the homage." SSee this illustrated in the <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">經註集證</span></cite>, in <abbr class="eoc">loc.</abbr> The prevailing disregard of the first part of the ceremony COnfucius considered inconsistent with the proper distance to be observed between prince and minister, and therefore he would be singular in adhering to the rules. <a href="chapter-9-3.xhtml#noteref-582" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-583" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Frailties from which Confucius was free.</b> <a href="chapter-9-4.xhtml#noteref-583" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-584" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">毋</span>, it is said, is not prohibitive here, but simply negative;—to make it appear that it was not by any effort, as <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">絕</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">毋</span> more naturally suggest, that Confucius attained to these things. 	<a href="chapter-9-4.xhtml#noteref-584" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-585" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius assured in a time of danger by his conviction of a divine mission.</b> Compare <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span></cite>, but the adventure to which this chapter refers is placed in the sage's history before the other, not long after he had resigned office, and left <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. <a href="chapter-9-5.xhtml#noteref-585" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-586" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There are different opinions as to what State <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽuang</span> belonged to. The most likely is that it was a border town of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng</span>, and its site is now to be found in the department of Kaifeng in Henan. It is said the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">Kʽuang</span> had suffered from <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">陽虎</span>, an officer of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, to whom Confucius bore a resemblance. As he passed by the place, moreover, a disciple, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顔刻</span>, who had been associated with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yang Hu</span> in his measures against <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽunang</span>, was driving him. These circumstances made the people think that Confucius was their old enemy, so that attacked him, and kept him prisoner for five days. The accounts of his escape vary, some of them being evidently fabulous. The disciples were in fear. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">畏</span> would indicate that Confucius himself was so, but this is denied. <a href="chapter-9-5.xhtml#noteref-586" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-587" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">wên</i> I render by "the cause of truth." More exactly, it is the truth embodied in literature, ceremonies, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and its use instead of <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">tao</i>, "truth in its principles," is attributed to Confucius's modesty. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">在茲</span>, "in this," referring to himself. <a href="chapter-9-5.xhtml#noteref-587" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-588" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There may be modesty in his use of <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">wên</i>, but he here identifies himself with the line of the great sages, to whom Heaven has intrusted the instruction of men. In all the six centuries between himself and king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span>, he does not admit of such another. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">後死者</span>, "he who dies afterwards," = a future mortal. <a href="chapter-9-5.xhtml#noteref-588" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-589" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>On the various ability of Confucius:—His sagehood not therein.</b> <a href="chapter-9-6.xhtml#noteref-589" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-590" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to the <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">周禮</span></cite>, the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">太宰</span> was the chief of the six great officers of State, but the use of the designation in Confucius's time was confined to the State of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span>, and hence the officer in the text must have belonged to one of them. See the <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">註疏</span></cite>, in <abbr class="eoc">loc.</abbr> The force of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span> is as appears in the translation. <a href="chapter-9-6.xhtml#noteref-590" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-591" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span> is responded to by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzû-kung</span> with <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">固</span>, "certainly," while yet by the use of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">將</span> he gives his answer an air of hesitancy. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">縱之</span>, "lets him go," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> does not restrict him at all. The officer had found the sagehood of Confucius in his various ability;—by the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">yu</i>, "moreover," <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzû-kung</span> makes that ability only an additional circumstance. <a href="chapter-9-6.xhtml#noteref-591" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-592" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Confucius explains his possession of various ability, and repudiates its being essential to the sage, or even to the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chün-tzû</i>. <a href="chapter-9-6.xhtml#noteref-592" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-593" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao</span> was a disciple, by surname <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">琴</span>), and styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzû-kʽai</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子開</span>), or <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzû-chang</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子張</span>). It is supposed that when these conversations were being digested into their present form, someone remembered that <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao</span> had been in the habit of mentioning the remark given, and accordingly it was appended to the chapter. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之云</span> indicates that it was a frequent saying of Confucius. <a href="chapter-9-6.xhtml#noteref-593" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-594" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius disclaims the knowledge attributed to him, and declares his earnestness in teaching.</b> <a href="chapter-9-7.xhtml#noteref-594" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-595" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first sentence here was probably an exclamation with reference to some remark upon himself as having extraordinary knowledge. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">叩其兩端</span>, "exhibit (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">叩</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">發動</span>, "to agitate") its two ends," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> discuss it from beginning to end. <a href="chapter-9-7.xhtml#noteref-595" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-596" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>For want of auspicious omens, Confucius gives up the hope of the triumph of his doctrines.</b> <a href="chapter-9-8.xhtml#noteref-596" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-597" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">fêng</i> is the male of a fabulous bird, which has been called the Chinese phoenix, said to appear when a sage ascends the throne or when right principles are going to triumph in the world. The female is called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">凰</span>. In the days of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shun</span>, they gambolled in his hall, and were heard singing on mount <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> in the time of king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span>. The river and the map carry us farther back still,—to the time of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fu-hsi</span>, to whom a monster with the head of a dragon, and the body of a horse, rose from the water, being marked on the back so as to give that first of the sages the idea of his diagrams. Confucius indorses these fables. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">吾已矣夫</span>,—see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span></cite>, and observes how <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">乎</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">夫</span> are interchanged. <a href="chapter-9-8.xhtml#noteref-597" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-598" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius's sympathy with sorrow, respect for rank, and pity for misfortune.</b> <a href="chapter-9-9.xhtml#noteref-598" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-599" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">齊</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">tzû</i>, "the lower edge of a garment," and joined with <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">衰</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">tsʽui</i>, "mourning garments," the two characters indicate the mourning of the second degree of intensity, where the edge is unhemmed, but cut <em>even</em>, instead of being ragged, the terms for which are <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">斬衰</span>. The phrase, however, seems to be for "in mourning" generally. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">少</span>, in 4th tone, "young." <a href="chapter-9-9.xhtml#noteref-599" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-600" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Yüan's</span> admiration of his master's doctrines; and his own progress in them.</b> <a href="chapter-9-10.xhtml#noteref-600" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-601" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">喟然歎</span>, "sighingly sighed." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仰</span> and the other verbs here are to be translated in the past tense, as the chapter seems to give an account of the progress of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui's</span> mind. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">忽焉</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">忽然</span>, "suddenly." <a href="chapter-9-10.xhtml#noteref-601" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-602" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">誘</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">引進</span>, "to lead forward." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">博我云云</span>,—<abbr>comp.</abbr><cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-9-10.xhtml#noteref-602" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-603" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">卓爾</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">卓然</span>, an adverb, "uprightly," "loftily." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">末</span>, in the sense of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">無</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">末由</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">無所由以用其力</span>, "I find myself unable to use my strength." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">也已</span>, "yea, indeed."—It was this which made him sigh. <a href="chapter-9-10.xhtml#noteref-603" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-604" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius's dislike of pretension, and contentment with his condition. </b><a href="chapter-9-11.xhtml#noteref-604" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-605" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">使</span>, "was causing," or wanted to cause. Confucius's had been a great officer, and enjoyed the services of ministers, as in a petty court. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzû-lu</span> would have surrounded him in his great sickness with the illusions of his former state, and brought on himself this rebuke. <a href="chapter-9-11.xhtml#noteref-605" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-606" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">縱</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">縱然</span>, as a conjunction, "letting it be that," = although. <a href="chapter-9-11.xhtml#noteref-606" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-607" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How the desire for office should be qualified by self-respect.</b> <a href="chapter-9-12.xhtml#noteref-607" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-608" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">諸</span> is interrogative here, as in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span></cite>. There being no nominative to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">轀</span>, like the "I" in the translation, we might render, "should it be put," <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">賈</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chia</i>, 4th tone = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">價</span>, "price," "value." The disciple wanted to elicit from Confucius why he declined office so much, and insinuated his question in this way. It seems better to translate <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">yü</i> here by "a gem," or a "precious stone," than by "a piece of jade." <a href="chapter-9-12.xhtml#noteref-608" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-609" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How barbarians can be civilized.</b> This chapter is to be understood, it is said, like <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span></cite>, not as if Confucius really wished to go among the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi</i>, but that he thus expressed his regret that his doctrine did not find acceptance in China. <a href="chapter-9-13.xhtml#noteref-609" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-610" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi</i>,—see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span></cite>. There were nine tribes of varieties (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">種</span>) of them, the yellow, white, red, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-9-13.xhtml#noteref-610" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-611" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">如之何</span>,—the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> refers to his purpose to go among the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi</i>. <a href="chapter-9-13.xhtml#noteref-611" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-612" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius's services in correcting the music of this native State and Adjusting The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Book of Poetry</i>.</b> <a href="chapter-9-14.xhtml#noteref-612" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-613" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Confucius returned from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> in his 69th year, and died five years after. The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">雅</span> (read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ya</i>, 3rd tone) and the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">頌</span> are the names of two, or rather three, of the divisions of the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</i></cite>, the former being the "elegant" or "correct" odes, to be used with music at royal festivals, and the latter the praise songs, celebrating principally the virtues of the founders of different dynasties, to be used in the services of the ancestral temple. <a href="chapter-9-14.xhtml#noteref-613" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-614" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius's very humble estimate of himself.</b> <a href="chapter-9-15.xhtml#noteref-614" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-615" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Comp.</abbr> <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span></cite>, but the things which Confucius here disclaims are of a still lower character than those there mentioned. Very remarkable is the last, as from the sage. The old interpreters treat <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">何有於我哉</span>, as they do in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span></cite>;—compare <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>  <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span></cite>, <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span></cite>, <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span></cite>, et <abbr class="eoc">al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公卿</span> stand together, indicating men of superior rank. If we distinguish between them, the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公</span> may express the princes, high officers in the royal court, and the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">卿</span>, the high officers in the princes' court. <a href="chapter-9-15.xhtml#noteref-615" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-616" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How Confucius was affected by a running stream.</b> <a href="chapter-9-16.xhtml#noteref-616" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-617" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>What does the <em>it</em> in the translation refer to? <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">者</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">如</span> indicate something in the sage's mind, suggested by the ceaseless movement of the water. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> is correct. <abbr>Comp.</abbr> <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mencius</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> <abbr>Pt.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-9-16.xhtml#noteref-617" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-618" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The rarity of a sincere love of virtue.</b><a href="chapter-9-17.xhtml#noteref-618" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-619" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">色</span> as in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-9-17.xhtml#noteref-619" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-620" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>That learners should not cease nor intermit their labours.</b> <a href="chapter-9-18.xhtml#noteref-620" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-621" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a fragment, like many other chapters, of some conversation, and the subject thus illustrated must be supplied, after the modern commentator, as in the translation, or, after the old, by "the following of virtues." See the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-ching</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 9</cite>, where the subject is virtuous consistency. We might expect <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">平</span> in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">平地</span> to be a verb, like <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲</span> in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爲山</span>, but a good sense cannot be made out by taking it so. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">雖</span>, = "though <em>only</em>," as many take it in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">Vi</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span></cite>. The lesson of the chapter is—that repeated acquisitions individually small will ultimately amount to much, and that the learner is never to give ever. <a href="chapter-9-18.xhtml#noteref-621" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-622" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui</span> the earnest student.</b> <a href="chapter-9-19.xhtml#noteref-622" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-623" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Confucius's fond recollection of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui</span> as a model student.</b> <a href="chapter-9-20.xhtml#noteref-623" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-624" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is said to have been spoken after <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui's</span> death. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">惜乎</span> looks as if it were so. The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">未</span>, "not yet," would rather make us think differently. <a href="chapter-9-20.xhtml#noteref-624" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-625" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>It is the end which crowns the work.</b><a href="chapter-9-21.xhtml#noteref-625" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-626" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How and why a youth should be regarded with respect.</b>
						<a href="chapter-9-22.xhtml#noteref-626" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-627" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The same person is spoken of throughout the chapter, as is shown by the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">亦</span> in the last sentence. This is not very conclusive, but it brings out a good enough meaning. With Confucius's remark compare that of John Trebonius, Luther's schoolmaster at Eisenach, who used to raise his cap to his pupils on entering the schoolroom, and gave as the reason—"There are among these boys men of whom God will one day make burgomasters, chancellors, doctors, and magistrates. Although you do not yet see them with the badges of their dignity, it is right that you should treat them with respect." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">後生</span>, "after born," a youth. See <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">先生</span>, <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-9-22.xhtml#noteref-627" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-628" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The hopelessness of the case of those who assent and approve without reformation or serious thought.</b> <a href="chapter-9-23.xhtml#noteref-628" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-629" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">法語之言</span>, "words of law-link admonition." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">巽</span> is the name of the 5th trigram, to which the element of "wind" is attached. Wind enters everywhere, hence the character is interpreted by "entering," and also by "mildness," "yielding." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">巽與之言</span>, "words of gentle insinuation." In <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">繹之爲貴</span>, an antecedent to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> is readily found in the preceding <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">言</span>, but in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">改之爲貴</span>, such an antecedent can only be found in a roundabout way. This is one of the cases which shows the inapplicability to Chinese composition of our strict syntactical apparatus. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">末</span> as in <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-6-23.xhtml#noteref-629" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-630" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a repetition of part of <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-9-24.xhtml#noteref-630" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-631" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The will unsubduable.</b> <a href="chapter-9-25.xhtml#noteref-631" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-632" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">三軍</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span></cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">帥</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shuai</i>, 4th tone, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">將帥</span>, "a general." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">匹</span>, "mate." We find in the dictionary—"Husband and wife of the common people are a pair (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">相匹</span>), and the application of the term being thus fixed, an individual man is called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">匹夫</span>, and individual woman <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">匹婦</span>. <a href="chapter-9-25.xhtml#noteref-632" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-633" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzû-lu's</span> brave contentment in poverty, but failure to seek the highest aims.</b> <a href="chapter9-26.xhtml#noteref-633" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-634" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the construction of this paragraph, compare <cite><abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span></cite>. The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">狐</span> is the fox. The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">貉</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ho</i>, is probably the badger. It is described as nocturnal in its habits, having a soft, warm fur. It sleeps much, and is carnivorous. This last characteristic is not altogether inapplicable to the badger. See the <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">本草獸部</span>.</cite> <a href="chapter-9-26.xhtml#noteref-634" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-635" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> Ode <b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span></b> 4</cite>. <a href="chapter-9-26.xhtml#noteref-635" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-636" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">終身</span>, not "all his life," as frequently, but "continually." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzû-lu</span> was a man of impulse, with many fine points, but not sufficiently reflective. <a href="chapter-9-26.xhtml#noteref-636" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-637" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Men are known in times of adversity.</b> <a href="chapter-9-27.xhtml#noteref-637" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-638" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">後彫</span>, "the after-withering," a meiosis for their being evergreens. <a href="chapter-9-27.xhtml#noteref-638" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-639" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The sequences of wisdom, virtue, and bravery.</b> <a href="chapter-9-28.xhtml#noteref-639" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-640" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仁者不憂</span>,—this is one of the sayings about virtue, which is only true when it is combined with trust in God. <a href="chapter-9-28.xhtml#noteref-640" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-641" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How different individuals stop at different stages of progress.</b> <a href="chapter-9-29.xhtml#noteref-641" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-642" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>More literally rendered, this chapter would be—"It may be possible with <em>some parties</em> together to study, <em>but</em> it may not yet be possible with them to go on to principles, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>" <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">權</span>, the weight of a steelyard, then "to weight." It is used here with reference to occurring events,—to weigh them and determine the application of principles to them. In the old commentaries, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">權</span> is used here in opposition to <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">經</span>, the latter being that which is always, and everywhere right, the former a deviation from that in particular circumstances, to bring things, right. This meaning of the term here is denied. The ancients adopted it probably from their interpretation of the second clause in the next chapter, which they made one with this. <a href="chapter-9-29.xhtml#noteref-642" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-643" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>The necessity of refelction.</b> <a href="chapter-9-30.xhtml#noteref-643" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-644" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is understood to be from one of the pieces of poetry, which were not admitted into the collection of the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih</i></cite>, and no more of it being preserved than what we have here, it is not altogether intelligible. There are long disputes about the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">唐棣</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> makes it a kind of small plum or cherry tree, whose leaves are constantly quivering, even when there is no wind; and adopting a reading, in a book of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chin</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">晉</span>) dynasty, of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">翩</span> for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">偏</span>, and changing <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">翻</span> into <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">反</span>, he makes out the meaning in the translation. The old commentators keep the text, and interpret,—"How perversely contrary are the flowers of the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang ti</i>!" saying that those flowers are first open and then shut. This view made them take <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">權</span> in the last chapter, as we have noticed. Who or what is meant by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爾</span> in <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爾思</span>, we cannot tell. The two <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">而</span> are mere expletives, completing the rhythm. <a href="chapter-9-30.xhtml#noteref-644" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-645" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With this paragraph <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> compares <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span></cite>—The whole piece is like the <cite>20th of the last Book</cite>, and suggests the thought of its being an addition by another hand to the original compilation. <a href="chapter-9-30.xhtml#noteref-645" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-646" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Heading of the book.</b>—<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鄉黨第十</span>, "The village, <abbr>No.</abbr> 10." This Book is different in its character from all the others in the work. It contains hardly any sayings of Confucius, but is descriptive of his ways and demeanour in a variety of places and circumstances. It is not uninteresting, but, as a whole, it hardly heightens our veneration for the sage. We seem to know him better from it, and perhaps to Western minds, after being viewed in his bedchamber, his undress, and at his meals, he becomes divested of a good deal of his dignity and reputation. There is something remarkable about the style. Only in one passage is its subject styled <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子</span>, "<em>The Master</em>." He appears either as <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孔子</span>, "The Philosopher <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung</span>," or as <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">君子</span>, "The superior man." A suspicion is thus raised that the chronicler had not the same relation to him as the compilers of the other Books. Anciently, the book formed only one chapter, but it is now arranged under seventeen divisions. Those divisions, for convenience in the translation, I continue to denominate chapters, which is done also in some native editions. <a href="book-10.xhtml#noteref-646" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-647" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Demeanour of Confucius in his village, in the ancestral temple, and the court.</b> <a href="chapter-10-1.xhtml#noteref-647" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-648" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to the dictionary, quoting from a record of "the former <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasty, the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鄉</span> contained 2,500 families, and the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">黨</span> only 500;" but the two terms are to be taken here together, indicating the residence of the sage's relatives. his native place in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> is doubtless intended, rather than the original seat of his family in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">恂恂如</span> is explained by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Su</span> "mild-like," and by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>, as in the translation, thinking probably that, with that meaning, it suited the next clause better. <a href="chapter-10-1.xhtml#noteref-648" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-649" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">便</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">pien</i>, the 2nd tone = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">辯</span>, "to debate," "to discriminate accurately." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">爾</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">耳</span>. In those two places of high ceremony and of government, it became the sage, it is said, to be precise and particular. Compare <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-10-1.xhtml#noteref-649" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-650" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Demeanour of Confucius at court with other great officers, and before the prince.</b> <a href="chapter-10-2.xhtml#noteref-650" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-651" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">朝</span> may be taken here as a verb, literally, = "courting." It was the custom for all the officers to repair at daybreak to the court, and wait for the ruler to give them an audience. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">大夫</span>, "Great officer," was a general name, applicable to all the higher officers in a court. At the royal court they were divided into three classes,—"highest," "middle," and "lowest," <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">上</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">中</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">下</span>, but the various princes had only the first and third. Of the first order there were properly three, the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">卿</span>, or nobles of the State, who were in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> the chiefs of the "three families." Confucius belonged himself to the lower grade. <a href="chapter-10-2.xhtml#noteref-651" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-652" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">踧踖</span> = "the feet moving uneasily," indicating the respectful anxiety of the mind. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與</span>, 2nd tone, here appears in the phrase <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">與與如也</span>, in a new sense. <a href="chapter-10-2.xhtml#noteref-652" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-653" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Demeanour of Confucius at the official reception of a visitor.</b> <a href="chapter-10-3.xhtml#noteref-653" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-654" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The visitor is supposed to be the ruler of another State. On the occasion of two princes meeting there was much ceremony. The visitor having arrived, he remained outside the front gate, and the host inside his reception room, which was in the ancestral temple. Messages passed between them by means of a number of officers called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">介</span>, on the side of the visitor, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">檳</span>, on teh side of the host, who formed a zigzag line of communication from the one to the other, and passed their questions and answers along, till an understanding about the visit was thus officially effected. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">足躩如</span> probably has the meaning which I have given in the translation. <a href="chapter-10-3.xhtml#noteref-654" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-655" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This shows Confucius's manner when engaged in the transmission of the messages between the prince and his visitor. The prince's nuncio, in immediate communication with himself, with the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">上檳</span>, the next was the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">承檳</span>, and below were one or more <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">紹檳</span>. Confucius must have been the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chʽêng pin</i>, bowing to the right as he transmitted a message to the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shang pin</i>, who was an officer of the higher grade, and to the left as he communicated one from him to the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shao pin</i>. <a href="chapter-10-3.xhtml#noteref-655" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-656" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The host having come out to receive his visitor, proceeded in with him, it is said, followed by all their internuncios in a line, and to his manner in this movement this paragraph is generally referred. But the duty of seeing the guest off, the subject of next paragraph, belonged to the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shang pin</i>, and could not be performed by Confucius as merely a <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chʽêng pin</i>. Hence arises a difficulty. Either it is true that Confucius was at one time raised to the rank of teh highest dignitaries of the State, or he was temporarily employed, form his knowledge of ceremonies, after the first act in the reception of visitors, to discharge the duties of one. Assuming this, the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">趨進</span> is to be explained of some of his movements in the reception room. How could he hurry forward when walking in file with the other internuncios? See the <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">拓餘説</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span></cite>. href="chapter-10-3.xhtml#noteref-656" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-657" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">必復命</span>, "would return the commission," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> he had seen the guest off, according to his duty, and reported it. The ways of China, it appears, were much the same anciently as now. A guest turns round and bows repeatedly in leaving, and the host cannot return to his place, till these salutations are ended. <a href="chapter-10-3.xhtml#noteref-657" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-658" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Demeanour of Confucius in the court at an audience.</b> <a href="chapter-10-4.xhtml#noteref-658" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-659" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The royal court consisted of five divisions, each having its peculiar gate. That of a prince of a State consisted only of three, whose gates were named <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">庫</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">雉</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">路</span>. The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公門</span> is the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">kʽu</i>, or first of these. The bending his body when passing through, high as the gate was, is supposed to indicate the great reverence which Confucius felt. <a href="chapter-10-4.xhtml#noteref-659" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-660" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不中門</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不中於門</span>, "He did not stand opposite the middle of the gateway." Each gate had a post in the centre, called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">闃</span>, by which it was divided into two halves, appropriated to ingress and egress. The prince only could stand in the centre of either of them, and <em>he</em> only could tread on the threshold or sill. <a href="chapter-10-4.xhtml#noteref-660" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-661" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">齊</span>, see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span></cite>. He is now ascending the steps to the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">堂</span>, "the dais," or raised platform in the inner apartment, where the prince held his council, or gave entertainments, and from which the family rooms of the palace branched off. <a href="chapter-10-4.xhtml#noteref-661" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-662" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>At the early formal audience at daybreak, when the prince came out of the inner apartment, and received the homage of the officers, he occupied a particular spot called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">宁</span> in <cite><abbr>par.</abbr> 3</cite>, but improperly. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">進</span> after <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">趨</span> is an addition that has somehow crept into the ordinary text. <a href="chapter-10-4.xhtml#noteref-661" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-662" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Demeanour of Confucius when employed on a friendly embassy.</b> <a href="chapter-10-5.xhtml#noteref-662" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-663" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">圭</span> may be translated "sceptre," in the sense simply of "a badge of authority." It was a piece of jade, conferred by the sovereign on the princes, and differed in size and shape, according to their rank. They took it with them when they attended the king's court, and, according to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> and the old interpreters, it was carried also by their representatives as their voucher, on occasions of embassies among themselves. In the <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">拓餘説</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span></cite>, however, it is contended, apparently on sufficient grounds, that the sceptre then employed was different from the other. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">勝</span>, 1st tone, "to be equal to," "able for." <a href="chapter-10-5.xhtml#noteref-663" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-664" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The preceding paragraph describes Confucius's manner in the friendly court, at his first interview, showing his credentials and delivering his message. That done, he had to deliver the various presents with which he was charged. This was called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">享</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">獻</span>. <a href="chapter-10-5.xhtml#noteref-664" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-665" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>After all the public presents were delivered, the ambassador had others of his own to give, and his interview for that purpose was called <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">私覿</span>.—<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> remarks that there is no record of Confucius ever having been employed on such a mission, and supposes that his chapter and the preceding are simply summaries of the manner in which he used to say duties referred to in them ought to be discharged. <a href="chapter-10-5.xhtml#noteref-665" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-666" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Rules of Confucius in regard to his dress.</b>—The discussions about the colours here mentioned are lengthy and tedious. I am not confident that I have given them all correctly in the translation. <a href="chapter-10-6.xhtml#noteref-666" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-667" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">君子</span>, used here to denote Confucius, can hardly have come from the hand of a disciple. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">紺</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">深青楊赤色</span>, "a deep azure flushed with carnation." <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">緅</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">絳色</span>, "a deep red;" it was dipped thrice in a red dye, and then twice in a black. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">飾</span>, "for ornament," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> for the edgings of the collar and sleeves. The <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">kan</i>, it is said, by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>, after <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung An-kuo</span>, was worn in fasting, and the <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">tsou</i> in mourning, on which account Confucius would not use them. See this and the account of the colours denied in the <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">拓餘説</span>, in <abbr class="eoc">loc.</abbr></cite> <a href="chapter-10-6.xhtml#noteref-667" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-668" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There are five colours which go by the name of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">正</span>, "correct," <abbr>viz.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">青</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">黃</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">赤</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">白</span>, <span xml:lang="zh">黑</span>, "azure, yellow, carnation, white, and black;" others, among with are <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">紅</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">紫</span>, go by the name of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">間</span>, or "intermediate." See the <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">集證</span>, in <abbr class="eoc">loc.</abbr> Confucius would use only correct colours, and moreover, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> adds, red and reddish-blue are liked by women and girls. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">䙝服</span>, his dress, when in private. <a href="chapter-10-6.xhtml#noteref-668" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-669" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">絺</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">綌</span> were made from the fibres of a creeping plant, the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">葛</span>. See the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> Ode <b epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</b></cite>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">必表而出之</span>, "he must display and have it outwards." The interpretation of this, as in the translation, after <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>, though differing from the old commentators, seems to be correct. <a href="chapter-10-6.xhtml#noteref-669" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-670" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The lamb's fur belonged to the court dress, the fawn's was worn on embassies, the fox's on occasions of sacrifice, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-10-6.xhtml#noteref-670" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-671" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Confucius knew how to blend comfort and convenience. <a href="chapter-10-6.xhtml#noteref-671" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-672" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This paragraph it is supposed, belong to the next chapter, in which case it is not the usual sleeping garment of Confucius that is spoken of, but the one he used in fasting. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">長</span>, 2nd tone, "over," "overplus." <a href="chapter-10-6.xhtml#noteref-672" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-673" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These are the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">䙝裘</span> of <cite>paragraph 5</cite>. <a href="chapter-10-6.xhtml#noteref-673" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-674" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The appendages of the girdle were, the handkerchief, a small knife, a spike for opening knots, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">去</span>, 3rd tone, "to put away." <a href="chapter-10-6.xhtml#noteref-674" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-675" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">裳</span> was the lower garment, reaching elow the knees like a kilt or petticoat. For court and sacrificial dress, it was made curtain-like, as wide at top as at bottom. In that worn on other occasions, Confucius saved the cloth in the way described. So, at least, says <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung An-kuo</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">殺</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shai</i>, 4th tone. <a href="chapter-10-6.xhtml#noteref-675" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-676" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lamb's fur was worn with black (<cite><abbr>par.</abbr> 4</cite>), but white is the colour of mourning in China, and Confucius would not visit mourners, but in a sympathising colour. <a href="chapter-10-6.xhtml#noteref-676" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-677" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">吉月</span>, "the fortunate day of the moon," <abbr>i.e.</abbr> the first of the month. This was Confucius's practice, after he had ceased to be in office. <a href="chapter-10-6.xhtml#noteref-677" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-678" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Rules observed by Confucius when fasting.</b> <a href="chapter-10-7.xhtml#noteref-678" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-679" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">齊</span>, read <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chai</i>, 1st tone; see <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. The <cite>6th paragraph</cite> of the last chapter should come in as the 2nd here. <a href="chapter-10-7.xhtml#noteref-679" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-680" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fasting was not from all food, but only from wine or spirits, and from pot herbs. Observe the difference between <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">變</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">遷</span>, the former "to change," the latter "to change from," "to remove."—The whole chapter may be compared with Matthew 6:16–18. <a href="chapter-10-7.xhtml#noteref-680" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-681" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Rules of Confucius about this food.</b> <a href="chapter-10-8.xhtml#noteref-681" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-682" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">膾</span>, "minced meat," the commentators say, was made of beef, mutton, or fish, <em>uncooked</em>. 100 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shing</i> of paddy were reduced to 30, to bring it to the state of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">精</span> rice. <a href="chapter-10-8.xhtml#noteref-682" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-683" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">飪</span> in the dictionary is "overdone," hence <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">失飪</span> = "wrong in being overdone." Some, however, make the phrase to mean, "badly cooked," either underdone or overdone. <a href="chapter-10-8.xhtml#noteref-683" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-684" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">食</span> (<i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shih</i>) <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">氣</span>, "the breath of the rice," or perhaps, "the life-sustaining power of it," bu <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">氣</span> can hardly be translated here. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">唯</span> = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">惟</span>, "only," showing, it is said, that in other thingshe had a limit, but the use of wine being to make glad, he could not beforehand set a limit to the quantity of it. See, however, the singular note in <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-10-8.xhtml#noteref-684" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-685" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Literally, "he did not take away ginger in eating." <a href="chapter-10-8.xhtml#noteref-685" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-686" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The prince, anciently (and it is still a custom), distributed among the assisting ministers the flesh of his sacrifice. Each would only get a little, and so it could be used at once. <a href="chapter-10-8.xhtml#noteref-686" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-687" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">瓜</span> should be changed into <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">必</span>, according to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</span>, however, retains it, and putting a comma after it, joins it with the two preceding specimens of spare diet. The "sacrificing" refers to a custom something like our saying grace. The master took a few grains of rice, or part of the other provisions, and placed them on the ground, among the sacrificial vessels, a tribute to the worthy or worthies who first taught the art of cooking. The Buddhist priests in their monasteries have a custom of this kind, and on public occasions, and when <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi-ying</span> gave an entertainment in Hong Kong in 1845, something like it is sometimes observed, but any such ceremony is unknown among the common habits of the people. However poor might be his fare, Confucius always observed. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">齊</span> (<i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chai</i>) = <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">齋</span>, the grave demeanour appropriate to fasting. <a href="chapter-10-8.xhtml#noteref-687" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-688" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Rule of Confucius about his mat.</b> <a href="chapter-10-8.xhtml#noteref-688" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-689" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Other ways of Confucius in his village.</b> <a href="chapter-10-10.xhtml#noteref-689" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-690" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>At sixty, people carried a staff. Confucius here showed his respect for age. <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">斯</span> has here an adverbial force, = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">即</span>. <a href="chapter-10-10.xhtml#noteref-690" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-691" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There were three <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">儺</span> ceremonies eery year, but that in the text was called "the great <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">no</i>," being observed in the winter season, when the officers led all the people of a village about, searching every house to expel demons, and drive away pestilence. It was conducted with great uproar, and little better than a play, but Confucius saw a good old idea in it, and when the mob was in his house, he stood on the eastern steps (the place of a host receiving guests) in full dress. Some make the steps those of his ancestral temple, and his standing there to be to assure the spirits of his shrine. <a href="chapter-10-10.xhtml#noteref-691" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-692" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Traits of COnfucius's intercourse with others.</b> <a href="chapter-10-11.xhtml#noteref-692" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-693" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The two bows were not to the messenger, but intended for the distant friend to whom he was being sent. <a href="chapter-10-11.xhtml#noteref-693" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-694" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">康</span> was the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">季康子</span> of <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span></cite> et <abbr class="eoc">al.</abbr> Confucius accepted the ift, but thought it necessary to let the donor know he could not, for the present at least, avail himself of it. <a href="chapter-10-11.xhtml#noteref-694" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-695" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>How Confucius valued human life.</b> <a href="chapter-10-12.xhtml#noteref-695" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-696" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A rule's <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">厩</span>was fitted to accommodate 216 horses. See the <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">集證</span>, in <abbr class="eoc">loc.</abbr></cite> It may be used indeed for a private stable, but it is more natural to take it here for the <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">國</span> or State <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chiu</i>. This is the view in the <cite><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">家語</span></cite>. <a href="chapter-10-12.xhtml#noteref-696" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-697" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><b>Demeanour of Confucius in relation to his prince.</b> <a href="chapter-10-13.xhtml#noteref-697" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-698" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He would not offer the cooked meat to the spirits of his ancestors, not knowing but it might previously have been offered by the prince to the spirits of his. But he reverently tasted it, as if he had been in the prince's presence. He "honoured" the gift of cooked food, "glorified" the undressed, and "was kind" to the living animal. <a href="chapter-10-13.xhtml#noteref-698" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-699" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">祭</span> here is that in <cite>chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 10</cite>. Among parties of equal rank, all performed the ceremony, but Confucius, with his prince, held that the prince sacrificed for all. He tasted everything, as if he had been a <em>cook</em>, it being the cook's duty to taste every dish, before the prince partook of it. <a href="chapter-10-13.xhtml#noteref-699" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-700" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">首</span>, in the 4th tone, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">頭向</span>, "the direction of the head." The head to the east was the proper position for a person in bed; a sick man might for comfort be lying differently, but Confucius would not see the prince but in the correct position, and also in the court dress, so far as he could accomplish it. <a href="chapter-10-13.xhtml#noteref-700" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-701" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He would not wait a moment, but let his carriage follow him. <a href="chapter-10-13.xhtml#noteref-701" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-702" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A repetition of <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span></cite>, of the questioning being on his first entrance on office very doubtful. <a href="chapter-10-14.xhtml#noteref-702" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
