<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Prolegomena Chapter I Section II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="prolegomena-chapter-1-section-2" epub:type="introduction">
			<hgroup>
				<h5>
					<span epub:type="title">Section</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h5>
				<h6 epub:type="subtitle">The Authority of the Chinese Classics.</h6>
			</hgroup>
			<p>This subject will be discussed in connection with each separate work, and it is only designed here to exhibit generally the evidence on which the Chinese classics claim to be received as genuine productions of the time to which they are referred. </p>
			<p>In the memoirs of the Former <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasty (<abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 202–<abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 24), we have one chapter which we may call the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Literature</i>. <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1393" id="noteref-1393" epub:type="noteref">1393</a> It commences thus: "After the death of Confucius,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1394" id="noteref-1394" epub:type="noteref">1394</a> there was an end of his exquisite words; and when his seventy disciples had passed away, violence began to be done to their meaning. It came about that there were five different editions of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽun Chʽiu</i>, four of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih</i>, and several of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi</i>. Amid the disorder and collisions of the warring states (<abbr class="era">481–220</abbr>), truth and falsehood were still more in a state of warfare, and a sad confusion marked the words of the various scholars. Then came the calamity inflicted under the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span> dynasty (<abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 220–205), when the literary monuments were destroyed by fire, in order to keep the people in ignorance. But, by and by, there arose the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasty, which set itself to remedy the evil wrong by the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span>. Great efforts were made to collect slips and tablets,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1395" id="noteref-1395" epub:type="noteref">1395</a> and the way was thrown wide open for the bringing in of books. In the time of the emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiao-wu</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1396" id="noteref-1396" epub:type="noteref">1396</a> (<abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 140–85), portions of the books being wanting and tablets lost, so that ceremonies and music were suffering great damage, he was moved to sorry, and said, 'I am very sad for this.' He therefore formed the plan of repositories, in which the books might be stored, and appointed officers to transcribe books on an extensive scale, embracing the works of the various scholars, that they might all be placed in the repositories. The emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽêng</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1397" id="noteref-1397" epub:type="noteref">1397</a> (<abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 32–5), finding that a portion of the book still continued dispersed or missing, commissioned <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên Nung</span>, the Superintendent of Guests,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1398" id="noteref-1398" epub:type="noteref">1398</a> to search for undiscovered books throughout the empire, and by special edict ordered the chief of the banqueting house, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Hsiang</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1399" id="noteref-1399" epub:type="noteref">1399</a>, to examine the classical works, along with the commentaries on them, the writings of the scholars, and all poetical productions; the Master-controller of Infantry,<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jên Hung</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1400" id="noteref-1400" epub:type="noteref">1400</a> to examine the books on the art of war; the GRand Historiographer, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yin Hsien</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1401" id="noteref-1401" epub:type="noteref">1401</a> to examine the books treating of the art of numbers (<abbr>i.e.</abbr> divination); and the Imperial Physician, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Chu-kuo</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1402" id="noteref-1402" epub:type="noteref">1402</a> to examine the books on medicine. Whenever any book was done with, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsing</span> forthwith arranged it, indexed it, and made a digest of it, which was presented to the emperor. While this work was in progress, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsing</span> died, and the emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ai</span> (<abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 6–<abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 1) appointed his son, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsin</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1403" id="noteref-1403" epub:type="noteref">1403</a>, as Master of the Imperial Carriages, to complete his father's work. On this, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsin</span> collected all the books, and presented a report of them, under seven divisions."</p>
			<p>The first of these divisions seems to have been a general catalogue<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1404" id="noteref-1404" epub:type="noteref">1404</a> containing perhaps only the titles of the works included in the other six. The second embraced the classical works.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1405" id="noteref-1405" epub:type="noteref">1405</a> From the abstract of it, which is preserved in the chapter referred to, we find that there were 294 collections of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi-ching</i> from thirteen different individuals or editors;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1406" id="noteref-1406" epub:type="noteref">1406</a> 412 collections of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-ching</i>, from nine different individuals; 416 volumes of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</i>, from six different individuals;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1407" id="noteref-1407" epub:type="noteref">1407</a> of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Books of Rites</i>, 555 collections, from thirteen different individuals; of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Books on Music</i>, 165 collections, from six different editors; 948 collections of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History</i>, under the heading of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽun Chʽiu</i>, from twenty-three different individuals; 229 collections of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yü</i>, including the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i> and kindred fragments, from twelve different individuals; of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadeg">Hsiao-ching</i>, embracing also the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ërh Ya</i>, and some other portions of the ancient literature, 59 collections, from eleven different individuals; and finally of the lesser <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Learning</i>, being works on the form of the characters, 45 collections, from eleven different individuals. The works of Mencius were included in the second division,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1408" id="noteref-1408" epub:type="noteref">1408</a> among the writings of what were deemed orthodox scholars,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1409" id="noteref-1409" epub:type="noteref">1409</a> of which there were 836 collections, from fifty-three different individuals.</p>
			<p>The above important document is sufficient to show how the emperors of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasty, as soon as they had made good their possession of the empire, turned their attention to recover the ancient literature of the nation, the classical books engaging their first care, and how earnestly and effectively the scholars of the time responded to the wishes of their rulers. In addition to the time responded to the wishes of their rulers. In addition to the facts specified in the preface to it, I may relate that the ordinance of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span> dynasty against possessing the classical books (with the exception, as it will appear in its proper place, of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi-ching</i>) was repealed by the second sovereign of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span>, the emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiao Hui</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1410" id="noteref-1410" epub:type="noteref">1410</a> in the fourth year of his reign <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 191, and that a large portion of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-ching</i> was recovered in the time of the third emperor, <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 179–157, while in the year <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 136 a special board was constituted, consisting of literati, who were put in charge of the five <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1411" id="noteref-1411" epub:type="noteref">1411</a></p>
			<p>The collections reported on by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Hsin</span> suffered damage in the troubles which began <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 8, and continued till the rise of the second or eastern <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasty in the year 25. The founder of it (<abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 25–57) zealously promoted the undertaking of his predecessors, and additional repositories were required for the books which were collected. His successors, the emperors <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiao-ming</span>/<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1412" id="noteref-1412" epub:type="noteref">1412</a> (58–75), <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiao-chang</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1413" id="noteref-1413" epub:type="noteref">1413</a> (76–88), and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiao-huo</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1414" id="noteref-1414" epub:type="noteref">1414</a> (89–105), took a part themselves in the studies and discussions of the literary tribunal, and the emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiao-ling</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1415" id="noteref-1415" epub:type="noteref">1415</a> between the years 172–178, had the text of the five <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</span>, as it had been fixed, cut in slabs of stone, and set up in the capital outside the gate of the Grand College. Some old accounts say that the characters were in three different forms, but they were only in one form;—see the 287th book of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Yi-Tsun's</span> great work.</p>
			<p>Since the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span>, the successive dynasties have considered the literary monuments of the country to be an object of their special care. Many of them have issued editions of the classics, embodying the commentaries of preceding generations. No dynasty has distinguished itself more in this line than the present Manchu possessors of the empire. In fine, the evidence is complete that the classical books of China have come down from at least a century before our Christian era, substantially the same as we have them at present.</p>
			<p>But it still remains to inquire in what condition we may suppose the books were, when the scholars of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasty commenced their labours upon them. They acknowledged that the tablets—we cannot here speak of <em>manuscripts</em>—were mutilated and in disorder. Was the injury which they had received of such an extent that all the care and study put forth on the small remains would be of little use? This question can be answered satisfactorily, only by an examination of the evidence which is adduced for the text of each particular classic; but it can be made apparent that there is nothing, in the nature of the case, to interfere with our believing that the materials were sufficient to enable the scholars to execute the work entrusted to them.</p>
			<p>The burning of the ancient books by order of the founder of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span> dynasty is always referred to as the greatest disaster which they sustained, and ith this is coupled the slaughter of many of the literati by the same monarch.</p>
			<p>The account which we have of these transactions in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historical Records</i> is the following:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1416" id="noteref-1416" epub:type="noteref">1416</a></p>
			<p>"In his 34th year (the 34th year, that is, after he had ascended the throne of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span>. It was only the 9th after he had been acknowledged sovereign of the empire, coinciding with <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 213), the emperor, returning from a visit to the south, which had extended as far as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span>, gave a feast in his palace at Xianyang, when the great scholars, amounting to seventy men, appeared and wished him long life.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1417" id="noteref-1417" epub:type="noteref">1417</a> One of the principal ministers, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou Chʽing-chʽên</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1418" id="noteref-1418" epub:type="noteref">1418</a> came forward and said, 'Formerly, the state of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span> was only 1000 <i xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">li</i> in extent, but your majesty, by your spirit-like efficacy and intelligent wisdom, has tranquillised and settled the whole empire, and driven away all barbarous tribes, so that, wherever the sun and moon shine, all rulers appear before you as guests acknowledged subjection. You have formed the states of the various princes into provinces and districts, where the people enjoy a happy tranquillity, suffering no more from the calamities of war and contention. This condition of things will be transmitted for 10,000 generations. From the highest antiquity there has been no one in awful virtue like your majesty.'</p>
			<p>"The emperor was pleased with this flattery, when <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽun-yü Yüeh</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1419" id="noteref-1419" epub:type="noteref">1419</a> one of the great scholars, a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>, advanced and said, 'The sovereigns of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yin</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>, for more than a thousand years, invested their sons and younger brothers, and meritorious ministers, with domains and rule, and could thus depend upon them for support and aid;—that I have heard. But now your majesty is in possession of all within the seas, and your sons and younger brothers are nothing but private individuals. The issue will be that someone will arise to play the part of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽien Chʽêng</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1420" id="noteref-1420" epub:type="noteref">1420</a> or of the six nobles of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsin</span>. Without the support <em>of your own family</em>, where will you find the aid which you may require? That a state of things not modelled from the lessons of antiquity can long continue;—that is what I have not heard. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽing</span> is now showing himself to be a flatterer, who increases the errors of your majesty, and not a loyal minister.'</p>
			<p>"The emperor requested the opinions of others on this representation, and the premier, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Ssǔ</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1421" id="noteref-1421" epub:type="noteref">1421</a> said, 'The five emperors were not one the double of the other, nor did the three dynasties accept one another's ways. Each had a peculiar system of government, not for the sake of the contrariety, but as being required by the changed times. Now, your majesty has laid the foundations of imperial sway, so that it will last for 10,000 generations. This is indeed beyond what a stupid scholar can understand. And, moreover, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh</span> only talks of things belonging to the three dynasties, which are not fit to be models to you. At other times, when the princes were all striving together, they endeavoured to gather the wandering scholars about them; but now, the empire is in a stable condition, and laws and ordinances issue from one <em>supreme authority</em>. Let those of the people who abide in their homes give their strength to the toils of husbandry, while those who become scholars should study the various laws and prohibitions. Instead of doing this, however, the scholars do not learn what belongs to the present day, but study antiquity. They go on to condemn the present time, leading the masses of the people astray, and to disorder.</p>
			<p>"'At the risk of my life, I, the prime minister, say: Formerly, when the nation was disunited and disturbed, there was no one who could give unity to it. The princes therefore stood up together; constant references were made to antiquity to the injury of the present state; baseless statements were dressed up to confound what was real, and men made a boast of their own peculiar learning to condemn what their rulers appointed. And now, when your majesty has consolidated the empire, and, distinguishing black from white, has constituted it a stable unity, they still honour their peculiar learning, and combine together; they teach men what is contrary to your laws. When they hear that an ordinance has been issued, everyone sets to discussing it with his learning. In the court, they are dissatisfied in heart; out of it, they keep talking in the streets. WHile they make a pretence of vaunting their master, they consider it fine to have extraordinary views of their own. And so they lead on the people to be guilty of murmuring and evil speaking. If these things are not prohibited, your majesty's authority will decline, and parties will be formed. The best way is to prohibit them. I pray that all the records in charge of the historiographers be burned, excepting those of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span>; that with the exception of those officers belonging to the Board of Great Scholars, all throughout the empire who presume to keep copies of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</i>, or the books of the hundred schools, be required to go with them to the officers in charge of the several districts, and burn them;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1422" id="noteref-1422" epub:type="noteref">1422</a> that all who may dare to speak together ab out the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu</i> be put to death, and their bodies exposed in the marketplace; that those who make mention of the past, so as to blame the present, but put to death along with their relatives; that officers who shall know of the violation of those rules and not inform against the offenders, be held equally guilty with them; and that whoever shall not have burned their books within thirty days after the issuing of the ordinance, be branded and sent to labour on the wall for four years. The only books which should be spared are those on medicine, divination, and husbandry. WHoever wants to learn the laws may go to the magistrates and learn of them.'</p>
			<p>"The imperial decision was—'Approved.'"</p>
			<p>The destruction of the scholars is related more briefly. In the year after the burning of the books, the resentment of the emperor was excited by the remarks and flight of two scholars who had been favourites with him, and he determined to institute a strict inquiry about all of their class in Xianyang, to find out whether they had been making ominous speeches about him, and disturbing the minds of the people. The investigation was committed to the censors,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1423" id="noteref-1423" epub:type="noteref">1423</a> and it being discovered that upwards of 460 scholars had violated the prohibitions, they were all buried alive in pits,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1424" id="noteref-1424" epub:type="noteref">1424</a> for a warning to the empire, while degradation and banishment were employed more strictly than before against all who fell under suspicion. The emperor's eldest son, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fu-su</span>, remonstrated with him, saying that such measures against those who repeated the words of Confucius and sought to imitate him, would alienate all the people from their infant dynasty, but his interference offended his father so much that he was sent off from court, to be with the general who was superintending the building of the great wall.</p>
			<p>No attempts have been made by Chinese critics and historians to discredit the record of these events, though some have questioned the extent of the injury inflicted by them on the monuments of their ancient literature. <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1425" id="noteref-1425" epub:type="noteref">1425</a> It is important to observe that the edict against the books did not extent to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi-ching</i>, which was exempted as being a work on divination, nor did it extend to the other classics which were in charge of the Board of Great Scholars. There ought to have been no difficulty in finding copies when the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasty superseded that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span>, and probably there would have been none but for the sack of the capital in <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 206 by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiang Yü</span>, the formidable opponent of the founder of the House of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span>. Then, we are told, the fired blazed for three months among the palaces and public buildings, and must have proved as destructive to the copies of the great scholars as the edict of the tyrant had been to the copies among the people.</p>
			<p>It is to be noted also that the life of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih Huang Ti</span> lasted only three years after the promulgation of his edict. He died in <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 210, and the reign of his second son who succeeded him lasted only other three years. A brief period of disorder and struggling for the supreme authority between different chiefs ensued; but the reign of the founder of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasty dates from <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 202. Thus, eleven years were all which intervened between the order for the burning of the books and the rise of that family, which signalized itself by the care which it bestowed for their recovery; signalized itself by the care which it bestowed for their recovery; and from the edict of the tyrant of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span> against private individuals having copies in their keeping, to its express abrogation by the emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiao Hui</span>, there were only twenty-two years. We may believe, indeed, that vigorous efforts to carry the edict into effect would not be continued longer than the life of its author,—that is, not for more than about three years. The calamity inflicted on the ancient books of China by the house of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span> could not have approached to anything like a complete destruction of them. There would be no occasion for the scholars of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasty, in regard to the bulk of their ancient literature, to undertake more than the work of recension and editing.</p>
			<p>The idea of forgery by them on a large scale is out of the question. TRhe catalogues of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liang Hsin</span> enumerated more than 13,000 volumes of a larger or smaller size, the productions of nearly 600 different writers, and arranged in thirty-eight subdivisions of subjects.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1426" id="noteref-1426" epub:type="noteref">1426</a> In the third catalogue, the first subdivision contained the orthodox writers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1427" id="noteref-1427" epub:type="noteref">1427</a> to the number of fifty-three, with 836 works or portions of their works. Between Mencius and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung Chi</span>, the grandson of Confucius, eight different authors have place. The second subdivision contained the works of the Taoist school,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1428" id="noteref-1428" epub:type="noteref">1428</a> amounting to 993 collections, from thirty-seven different authors. The sixth subdivision contained the Mohist writers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1429" id="noteref-1429" epub:type="noteref">1429</a> to the number of six, with their productions in 86 collections. I specify these two subdivisions, because they embrace the works of scholars or sects antagonistic to that of Confucius, and some of them still hold a place in Chinese literature, and contain many references to the five classics, and to Confucius and his disciples.</p>
			<p>The inquiry pursued in the above paragraphs conducts us to the conclusion that the materials from which the classics, as they have come down to us, were compiled and edited in the two centuries preceding our Christian era, were genuine remains, going back to a still more remote period. The injury which they sustained from the dynasty of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span> was, I believe, the same in character as that to which they were exposed during all the time of "the warring states." It may have been more intense in degree, but the constant warfare which prevailed for some centuries among the different states which composed the kingdom was eminently unfavourable to the cultivation of literature. Mencius tells us how the princes had made away with many of the records of antiquity, from which their own usurpations and innovations might have been condemned.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1430" id="noteref-1430" epub:type="noteref">1430</a> Still the times were not unfruitful, either in scholars or statesmen, to whom the ways and monuments of antiquity were dear, and the space from the rise of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span> dynasty to the death of Confucius was not very great. It only amounted to 258 years. Between these two periods Mencius stands as a connecting link. Born probably in the year <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 371, he reached, by the intervention of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung Chi</span>, back to the sage himself, and as his death happened <abbr class="eoc">BC</abbr> 288, we are brought down to within nearly half a century of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span> dynasty. From all these considerations we may proceed with confidence to consider each separate work, believing that we have in these classics and books what the great sage of China and his disciples gave to their country more than 2000 years ago.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
