<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Prolegomena Chapter II Section III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="prolegomena-chapter-2-section-3" epub:type="introduction">
			<hgroup>
				<h5>
					<span epub:type="title">Section</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h5>
				<h6 epub:type="subtitle">Of Commentaries Open the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i></h6>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It would be a vast and unprofitable labour to attempt to give a list of the commentaries which have been published on this work. My object is merely to point out how zealously the business of interpretation was undertaken, as soon as the text had been recovered by the scholars of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasty, and with what industry it has been preserved in down to the present times.</p>
			<p>Mention has been made, in section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 6, of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun</i> of prince <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chang</span>, published in the half century before our era. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pao Hsien</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1458" id="noteref-1458" epub:type="noteref">1458</a> a distinguished scholar and officer, of the reign of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kuang-wu</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1459" id="noteref-1459" epub:type="noteref">1459</a> the first emperor of the Eastern <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasty, <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 25–57, and another scholar of the surname <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1460" id="noteref-1460" epub:type="noteref">1460</a> less known but of the same time, published works, containing arrangements of this in chapters and sentences, with explanatory notes. The critical work of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung An-kuo</span> on the old <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yü</i> has been referred to. That was lost in consequence of suspicious under which <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">An-kuo</span> fell towards the close of the reign of the emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>, but in the time of the emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shun</span>, <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 126–144, another scholar, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ma Jung</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1461" id="noteref-1461" epub:type="noteref">1461</a> undertook the exposition of the characters in the old <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun</i>, giving at the same time his views of the general meaning. The labours of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Hsüan</span> in the second century have been mentioned. Not long after his death, there ensued there ensued a period of anarchy, when the empire was divided into three governments, well known from the celebrated historical romance, called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Three Kingdoms</i>. The strongest of them, the house of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, patronized literature, and three of its high officers and scholars, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên Chʽün</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Su</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou Shêng-lieh</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1462" id="noteref-1462" epub:type="noteref">1462</a> in the first half, and probably the second quarter, of the third century, all gave to the world their notes on the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>.</p>
			<p>Very shortly after, five of the great ministers of the government of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun Yung</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Chʽung</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Hsi</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsün Kʽai</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1463" id="noteref-1463" epub:type="noteref">1463</a> united in the production of one great work, entitled, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Collection of Explanations of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yü</span></i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1464" id="noteref-1464" epub:type="noteref">1464</a> It embodied the labours of all the writers which have been mentioned, and, having been frequently reprinted by succeeding dynasties, it still remains. The preface of the five compilers, in the form of a memorial to the emperor, so called, of the house of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, is published with it, and has been of much assistance to me in writing these sections. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</span> was the leader among them, and the work is commonly quoted as if it were the production of him alone.</p>
			<p>From <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</span> downwards, there had hardly been a dynasty which has not contributed it labourers to the illustration of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>. In the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liang</span>, which occupied the throne a good part of the sixth century, there appeared the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Comments of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huang Kʽan</span></i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1465" id="noteref-1465" epub:type="noteref">1465</a> who to the seven authorities cited by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</span> added other thirteen, being scholars who had deserved well of the classic during the intermediate time. Passing over other dynasties, we come to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span>, <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 960–1279. An edition of the classics was published by imperial authority, about the beginning of the eleventh century, with the title of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Correct Meaning</i>. The principle scholar engaged in the undertaking was <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsing Pʽing</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1466" id="noteref-1466" epub:type="noteref">1466</a> The portion of it on the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1467" id="noteref-1467" epub:type="noteref">1467</a> is commonly reprinted in "The Thirteen Classics," after <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen's</span> explanations. But the names of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span> dynasty are all thrown into the shade by that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>, than whom China has not produced a greater scholar. He composed, or his disciples compiled, in the twelfth century, three works on the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>:—the first called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collected Meanings</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1468" id="noteref-1468" epub:type="noteref">1468</a> the second <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collected Comments</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1469" id="noteref-1469" epub:type="noteref">1469</a> and the third, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Queries</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1470" id="noteref-1470" epub:type="noteref">1470</a> Nothing could exceed the grace and clearness of his style, and the influence which he has exerted on the literature of China has been almost despotic.</p>
			<p>The scholars of the present dynasty, however, seem inclined to question the correctness of his views and interpretations of the classics, and the chief place among them is due to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mao Chʽi-ling</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1471" id="noteref-1471" epub:type="noteref">1471</a> known by the local name of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsi-ho</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1472" id="noteref-1472" epub:type="noteref">1472</a> His writings, under the name of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Collected Works of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsi-ho</span></i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1473" id="noteref-1473" epub:type="noteref">1473</a> have been published in eighty volumes, containing between three and four hundred books or sections. He has nine treatises on the Four Books, or parts of them, and deserves to take rank with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Hsüan</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> at the head of Chinese scholars, though he is a vehement opponent of the latter. Most of his writings are to be found also in the great work called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Collection of Works on the Classics, under the Imperial Dynasty of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽing</span></i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1474" id="noteref-1474" epub:type="noteref">1474</a> which contains 1400 sections, and is a noble contribution by the scholars of the present dynasty to the illustration of its ancient literature.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
