<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Prolegomena Chapter III Section III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="prolegomena-chapter-3-section-3" epub:type="introduction">
			<hgroup>
				<h5>
					<span epub:type="title">Section</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h5>
				<h6 epub:type="subtitle">His Immediate Disciples</h6>
			</hgroup>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien</span> makes Confucius say:—"The disciples who received my instructions, and could themselves comprehend them, were seventy-seven individuals. THey were all scholars of extraordinary ability.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1705" id="noteref-1705" epub:type="noteref">1705</a> The common saying is, that the disciples of the sage were three thousand, whille among them there were seventy-two worthies. I propose to give here a list of all those whose names have come down to us, as being his followers. Of the greater number it will be seen that we know nothing more than their names and surnames. My principal authorities will be the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historical Records</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Sacrificial Canon for the Sage's Temple, with Plates</i>, and the chapter on "The Disciples of Confucius" prefixed to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Four Books, Text and Commentary, with Proofs and Illustrations</i>. In giving a few notices of the better-known individuals, I will endeavour to avoid what may be gathered from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>.</p>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Hui</span>, by designation <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-yüan</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顔回，字子淵</span>). He was a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, the favourite of his master, whose junior he was by thirty years, and whose disciple he became when he was quite a youth. "After I got <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui</span>," Confucius remarked, "the disciples came closer to me." We are told that once, when he found himself on the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Nêng</span> hill with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-lu</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kung</span>, Confucius asked them to tell him their different aims, and he would choose between them. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-lu</span> began, and when he had done, the master said, "It marks your bravery." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kung</span> followed, on whose words the judgment was, "They show your discriminating eloquence." At last came <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Yüan</span>, who said, "I should like to find an intelligent king and sage ruler whom I might assist. I would diffuse among the people instructions on the five great points, and lead them on by the rules of propriety and music, so that they should not care to fortify their cities by walls and moats, but would fuse their swords and spears into implements of agriculture. They should send forth their flocks without fear into the plains and forests. There should be no sunderings of families, no widows or widowers. For a thousand years there would be no calamity of war. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yu</span> would have no opportunity to display his bravery, or <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzʽǔ</span> to display his oratory." The master pronounced, "How admirable is this virtue!"</p>
					<p>When <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui</span> was twenty-nine, his hair was all white, and in three years more he died. He was sacrificed to, along with Confucius, by the first emperor of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasty. The title which he now has in the sacrificial canon,—"Continuator of the sage," was conferred in the ninth year of the emperor, or, to speak more correctly, of the period, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chia-ching</span>, <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 1530. Almost all the present sacrificial titles of the worthies in the temple were fixed at that time. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui's</span> place is the first of the four assessors, on the east of the sage.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1706" id="noteref-1706" epub:type="noteref">1706</a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Min Sun</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽien</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">閔損，字子騫</span>). He was a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, fifteen years younger than Confucius, according to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien</span>, but fifty year younger, according to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i>, which latter authority is followed in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Annals of the Empire</i>. When he first came to Confucius, we are told, he had a starved look,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1707" id="noteref-1707" epub:type="noteref">1707</a> which was by-and-by exchanged for one of fullness and satisfaction.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1708" id="noteref-1708" epub:type="noteref">1708</a> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kung</span> asked him how the change had come about. He replied, "I came from the midst of my reeds and sedges into the school of the master. He trained my mind to filial piety, and set before me the examples of the ancient kings. I felt a pleasure in his instructions; but when I went abroad, and saw the people in authority, with their umbrellas and banners, and all the pomp and circumstance of their trains, I also felt pleasure in that show. These two things assaulted each other in my breast. I could not determine which to prefer, and so I wore that look of distress. But now the lessons of our master have penetrated deeply into my mind. My progress also has been helped by the example of you my fellow-disciples. I now know what I should follow and what I should avoid, and all the pomp of power is no more to me than the dust of the ground. It is on this account that I have that look of fullness and satisfaction." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽien</span> was high in Confucius's esteem. He was distinguished for his purity and filial affection. His place in the temple is the first, east, among "the wise ones," immediately after the four assessors. He was first sacrificed to along with Confucius, as is to be understood of the other "wise ones," excepting in the case of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yu Jo</span>, in the eighth year of the style <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽai-yüan</span> of the sixth emperor of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> dynasty, <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 720. His title, the same as that of all but the assessors, is—"The ancient worthy, the philosopher <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Min</span>."</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan Kêng</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po-niu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">冉耕，字白</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">百</span>] <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">牛</span>). He was a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, and Confucius's junior only by seven years. When Confucius became minister of crime, he appointed <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po-niu</span> to the office, which he had himself formerly held, of commandant of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chung-tu</span>. His tablet is now fourth among "the wise ones," on the wise.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan Yung</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chung-kung</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">冉雍，字仲弓</span>). He was of the same clan as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan Kêng</span>, and twenty-nine years younger than Confucius. He had a bad father, but the master declared that was not to be counted to him, to detract from his admitted excellence. His place is among "the wise ones," the second, east.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan Chʽiu</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-yu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">冉求，字子有</span>). He was related to the two former, and of the same age as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chung-kung</span>. He was noted among the disciples for his versatile ability and many acquirements. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kung</span> said of him, "Respectful to the old, and kind to the young; attentive to guests and visitors; fond of learning and skilled in many arts; diligent in his examination of things:—these are what belong to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan Chʽiu</span>." It has been noted in the life of Confucius that it was by the influence of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-yu</span> that he was finally restored to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. He occupies the third place, west, among "the wise ones."</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chung Yu</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-lu</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi-lu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仲由，字子路，又字季路</span>). Hw e was a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pʽien</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">卞</span>) in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, and only nine years younger than Confucius. At their first interview, the master asked him what he was fond of, and he replied, "My long sword." Confucius said, "If to your present ability there were added the results of learning, you would be a very superior man." "Of what advantage would learning be to me?" asked <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-ku</span>. "There is a bamboo on the southern hill, which is straight itself without being bent. If you cut it down and use it, you can send it through a rhinoceros's hid;—what is the use of learning?" "Yes," said the master; "but if you feather it and point it with steel, will it not penetrate more deeply?" <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-lu</span> bowed twice, and said, "I will reverently receive your instructions." Confucius was wont to say, "From the time that I got <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yu</span>, bad words no more came to my ears." For some time <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-lu</span> was chief magistrate of the district of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pʽu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">蒲</span>), where his administration commanded the warm commendations of the master. He died finally in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, as has been related <cite>above</cite>. His tablet is now the fourth, east, from those of the assessors.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsai Yü</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-wo</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">宰予，字子我</span>). He was a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, but nothing is mentioned of his age. He had "a sharp mouth," according to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien</span>. Once, when he was at the court of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span> on some commission, the king <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chao</span> offered him an easy carriage adorned with ivory for his master. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yü</span> replied, "My master is a man who would rejoice in a government where right principles were carried out, and can find his joy in himself when that is not the case. Now right principles and virtue are as it were in a state of slumber. His wish is to rouse and put them in motion. Could he find a prince really anxious to rule according to them, he would walk on foot to his court, and be glad to do so. Why need he receive such a valuable gift as this from so great a distance?" Confucius commended this reply; but where he is mentioned in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-wo</span> does not appear to great advantage. He took service in the state of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>, and was chief magistrate of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lin-tzǔ</span>, where he joined with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽien Chʽang</span> in some disorderly movement,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1709" id="noteref-1709" epub:type="noteref">1709</a> which led to the destruction of his kindred, and made Confucius ashamed of him. His tablet is now the second, west, among "the wise ones."</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tuan-mu Tzʽǔ</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kung</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">端木賜，字子貢</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子贛</span>]), whose place is now third, east, from the assessors. He was a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">衞</span>), and thirty-one years younger than Confucius. He had great quickness of natural ability, and appears in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i> as one of the most forward talkers among the disciples. Confucius used to say, "From the time that I got <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzʽǔ</span>, scholars from a distance came daily resorting to me." Several instances of the language which he used to express his admiration of the master have been given in the last section. Here is another:—The duke <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> asked <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kung</span> how <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chung-ni</span> was to be ranked as a sage. "I do not know," was the reply. "I have all my life had the heaven over my head, but I do not know its height, and the earth under my feet, but I do not know its thickness. In my serving of COnfucius, I am like a thirsty man who goes with his pitcher to the river, and there he drinks his fill, without knowing the river's depth." He took leave of COnfucius to become commandant of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsin-yang</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">信陽宰</span>), when the master said to him, "In dealing with your subordinates, there is nothing like moderation. Hold fast these two things, and do not swerve from them. To conceal men's excellence is to obscure the worthy; and to proclaim people's wickedness is the part of a mean man. To speak evil of those whom you have not sought the opportunity to instruct is not the way of friendship and harmony." Subsequently <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kung</span> was high in office both in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, and finally died in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>. We saw how he was in attendance on Confucius at the time of the sage's death. Many of the disciples built huts near the master's grave, and mourned for him three years, but <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kung</span> remained sorrowing slone for three years more.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Yen</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-yu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">言偃，字子游</span>), now the fourth in the western range of "the wise ones." He was a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">吳</span>), forty-five years younger than Confucius, and distinguished for his literary acquirements. Being made commandant of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu-chʽêng</span>, he transformed the character of the people by "proprieties" and music, and was priased by the master. After the death of COnfucius, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi Kʽang</span> asked <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen</span> how that event had made no sensation like that which was made by the death of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽan</span>, when the men laid aside their bowstring rings and girdle ornaments, and the women laid aside their pearls and earrings, and the voice of weeping was heard in the lanes for three months. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen</span> replied, "The influences of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽan</span> and my master might be compared to those of overflowing water and the fattening rain. Wherever the water in its overflow reaches, men take knowledge of it, while the fattening rain falls unobserved."</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pu Shang</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hsia</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">卜商，字子夏</span>). It is not certain to what state he belonged, his birth being assigned to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">衞</span>), to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">魏</span>), and to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">温</span>). He was forty-five years younger than Confucius, and lived to a great age, for we find him, <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 406, at the court of the prince <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wên</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">魏</span>), to whom he gave copies of some of the classical books. He is represented as a scholar extensively read and exact, but without great comprehension of mind. What is called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mao's</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-ching</span></i> (<span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">毛詩</span>) is said to contain the views of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hsia</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-yang Kao</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ku-liang Chʽih</span> are also said to have studied the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽun Chʽiu</i> with him. On the occasion of the death of his son he wept himself blind. His place is the fifth, east, among "the wise ones."</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuan-sun Shih</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chang</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顓孫師，字子張</span>), has his tablet, corresponding to that of the preceding, on the west. He was a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">陳</span>), and forty-eight years younger than COnfucius. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kung</span> said, "Not to boast of his admirable merit; not to signify joy on account of noble station; neither insolent nor indolent; showing no pride to the dependent:—these are the characteristics of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuan-sun Shih</span>." When he was sick, he called (his son) <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shên-hsiang</span> to him, and said, "We speak of his <em>end</em> in the case of a superior man, and of his <em>death</em> in the case of a mean man. May I think that it is going to be the former with me today?"</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng Shên</span> [or <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽan</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-yü</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">曾參，字子輿</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子與</span>]). He was a native of south Wuchang, and forty-six years younger than Confucius. In his sixteenth year he was sent by his father into <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span>, where Confucius then was, to learn under the sage. Excepting perhaps <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Hui</span>, there is not a name of greater note in the Confucian school. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kung</span> said of him, "There is no subject which he has not studied. His appearance is respectful. His virtue is solid. His words command credence. Before great men he draws himself up in the pride of self-respect. His eyebrows are those of longevity." He was noted for his filial piety, and after the death of his parents, he could not read the rites of mourning without being led to think of them, and moved to tears. He was a voluminous writer. Ten books of his composition are siad to be contained in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rites of the elder <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tai</span></i> (<span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">大戴禮</span>). The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Classic of Filial Piety</i> he is said to have made under the eye of Confucius. He was first associated with the sacrifices to Confucius in <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 668, but in 1267 he was advanced to be one of the sage's four assessors. His title—"Exhibitor of the fundamental principles of the sage," dates from the period of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chia-ching</span>, as mentioned in speaking of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Hui</span>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tan-tʽai Mieh-ming</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-yü</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">澹臺滅明，字子羽</span>). He was a native of Wuchang, thirty-nine years younger than Confucius, according to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historical Records</i>, but forty-nine, according to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i>. He was excessively ugly, and Confucius thought meanly of his talents in consequence, on his first application to him. After completing his studies, he travelled to the south as far as the Yangtze. Traces of his presence in that part of the country are stilled pointed out in the department of Suzhou. He was followed by about three hundred disciples, to whom he laid down rules for their guidance in their intercourse with the princes. When Confucius heard of his success, he confessed how he had been led by his bad looks to misjudge him. He, with nearly all the disciples whose names follow, first had a place assigned to him in the sacrifices to Confucius in <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 739. The place of his tablet is the second, east in the outer court, beyond that of the "assessors" and "wise ones."</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Corresponding to the preceding, on the west, is the tablet of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fu Pu-chʽi</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-tsien</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">宓</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">密</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">虙</span>, all = <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">伏</span>] <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">不齊，字子賤</span>). He was a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, and, according to different accounts, thirty, forty, and forty-nine years younger than Confucius. He was commandant of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tan-fu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">單父宰</span>), and hardly needed to put forth any personal effort. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu-ma Chʽi</span> had been in the same office, and had succeeded by dint of the greatest industry and toil. He asked <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pu-chʽ</span> how he managed so easily for himself, and was answered, "I employ men; you employ men's strength." People pronounced <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fu</span> to be a superior man. He was also a writer, and his works are mentioned in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Hsin's</span> catalogue.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Next to that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mieh-ming</span> is the tablet of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüan Hsien</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-ssǔ</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">原憲，字子思</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span>, or, according to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Hsüan</span>, of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, and younger than Confucius by thirty-six years. He was noted for his purity and modesty, and for his happiness in the principles of the master amid deep poverty. After the death of COnfucius, he lived in obscurity in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>. In the notes to <cite><abbr>Ana.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span></cite>, I have referred to an interview which he had with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kung</span>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-yeh Chʽang</span> <abbr>al.</abbr> [<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chih</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽang</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chih</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公冶長</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">芝</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子長</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">子之</span>]), has his tablet next to that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pu-chʽi</span>. He was son-in-law to Confucius. His nativity is assigned both to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> and to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Nan-kung Kuo</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-yung</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">南宮括</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">适</span> and, in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">縚</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽao</span>)], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子容</span>), has the place at the east next to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüan Hsien</span>. It is a question much debated whether he was the same with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Nan-kung Chêng-shu</span>, who accompanied Confucius to the court of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span>, or not. On occasion of a fire breaking out in the palace of duke <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ai</span>, while others were intent on securing the contents of the treasury, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Nan-kung</span> directed his efforts to save the library, and to him was owing the preservation of the copy of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou Li</i> which was in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, and other ancient monuments.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-hsi Ai</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi-tzʽǔ</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi-chʽên</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公晳哀，字季次</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">季沉</span>]). His tablet follows that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-yeh</span>. He was a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, or of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>. Confucius commended him for refusing to take office with any of the families which were encroaching on the authority of the princes of the states, and for choosing to endure the severest poverty rather than sacrifices a tittle of his principles.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng Tien</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsi</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">曾蒧</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">點</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字晳</span>). He was the father of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng Shên</span>. His place in the temples is the hall to Confucius's ancestors, where his tablet is the first, west.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Wu-yao</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顔無繇，字路</span>). He was the father of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Hui</span>, younger than Confucius by six years. His sacrificial place is the first, east, in the same hall as the last.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Following the tablet of /<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Nan-kung Kuo</span> is that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shang Chü</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-mu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">商瞿，字子木</span>). To him, it is said, we are indebted for the preservation of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi-ching</i>, which he received from Confucius. Its transmission step by step, from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chü</span> down to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasty, is minutely set forth.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Next to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-hsi Ai</span> is the place of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kao Chʽai</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kao</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi-kao</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">高柴，字子羔</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">季羔</span>; for <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">羔</span> moreover, we find <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">皋</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">睪</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>, according to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i>, but of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, according to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Hsüan</span>. He was thirty (some say forty) years younger than Confucius, dwarfish and ugly, but of great worth and ability. At one time he was criminal judge of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, and in the execution of his office condemned a prisoner to lose his feet. Afterwards that same man saved his life, when he was flying from the state. Confucius praised <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽai</span> for being able to administer stern justice with such a spirit of benevolence as to disarm resentment.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shang Chü</span> is followed by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi-tiao Kʽai</span> [<abbr>prop.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kʽai</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-jo</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hsiu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">漆雕開</span> [<abbr>pr.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">啟</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子開</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子若</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子脩</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽai</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">蔡</span>), or, according to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Hsüan</span>, of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. We only know him as a reader of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-ching</i>, and refusing to go into office.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-po Liao</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chou</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公伯僚，字子周</span>). He appears in the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span></cite>, slandering <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-lu</span>. It is doubtful whether he should have a place among the disciples.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Kêng</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-niu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">司馬耕，字子牛</span>), follows <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi-tiao Kʽai</span>; also styled <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">黎耕</span>. He was a great talker, a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span>, and a brother of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huan Tʽui</span>, to escape from whom seems to have been the labour of his life.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The place next <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kao Chʽai</span> is occupied by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fan Hsü</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽih</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">樊須，字子遲</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>, or, according to others, of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, and whose age is given as thrity-six and forty-six years younger than Confucius. When young, he distinguished himself in a military command under the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi</span> family.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yu Jo</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-jo</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">有若，字子若</span>). He was a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, and his age is stated very variously. He was noted among the disciples for his great memory and fondness for antiquity. After the death of COnfucius, the rest of the disciples, because of some likeness in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jo's</span> speech to the master, wished to render the same observances to him which they had done to Confucius, but on <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng Shên's</span> demurring to the thing, they abandoned the purpose. The tablet of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-jo</span> is now the sixth, east, among "the wise ones," to which place it was promoted in the third year of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien-lung</span> of the present dynasty. This was done in compliance with a memorial from the president of one of the boards, who said he was moved by a dream to make the request. We amy suppose that his real motives were—a wish to do justice to the merits of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-jo</span>, and to restore the symmetry of the tablets in the "hall of the great and complete one," which had been disturbed by the introduction of tablet of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi Hsi</span> in the preceding reign.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-hsi Chʽih</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hua</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公西赤，字子華</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, younger than Confucius by forty-two years, whose place is the fourth, west, in the outer court. He was noted for his knowledge of ceremonies, and the other disciples devolved on him all the arrangements about the funeral of the master.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu-ma Shih</span> [or <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽi</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">巫馬施</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">期</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子期</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子旗</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên</span>, or, according to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên</span>, or, according to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Hsüan</span>, of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, thirty years younger than Confucius. His tablet is on the east, next to that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Kêng</span>. It is related that on one occasion, when Confucius was about to set out with a company of the disciples on a walk or journey, he told them to take umbrellas. They met with a heavy shower, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu-ma</span> asked him, saying, "There were no clouds in the morning; but after the sun had risen, you told us to take umbrellas. How did you know that it would rain?" Confucius said, "The moon last evening was in the constellation <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pi</span>, and is it not said in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Shih-ching</i>, 'When the moon is in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pi</span>, there will be heavy rain?' It was thus I knew it."</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liang Chan</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-yü</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">梁鱣</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">鯉</span>] <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字叔魚</span>), occupies the eighth place, west, among the tablets of the outer court. He was a man of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>, and his age is stated as twenty-nine and thirty-nine years younger than Confucius. The following story is told in connection with him.—When he was thirty, being disappointed that he had no son, he was minded to put away his wife. "Do not do so," said <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shang Chü</span> to him. "I was thirty-eight before I had a son, and my mother was then about to take another wife for me, when the master proposed sending me to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>. My mother was unwilling that I should go, but Confucius said, 'Don't be anxious. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chü</span> will have five sons after he is forty.' It has turned out so, and I apprehend it is your fault, and not your wife's, that you have no son yet." <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chan</span> took this advice, and in the second year after, he had a son.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Hsing</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsin</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-liu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顔幸</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">辛</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">柳</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">韋</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子柳</span>), occupies the place, east, after <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu-ma Shih</span>. He was a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, and forty-six years younger than Confucius.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liang Chan</span> is followed on the west <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan Ju</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-lu</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-tsêng</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-yü</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">冉孺</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">儒</span>] <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">宇子魯</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子曾</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子魚</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, and fifty years younger than Confucius.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Hsing</span> is followed on the east by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Hsü</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hsün</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">曹卹，字子循</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽai</span>, fifty years younger than Confucius.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Next on the west <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po Chʽien</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hsi</span>, or, in the current copies of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hsi</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">伯虔，字子皙</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子析</span>] or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子楷</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, fifty years younger than Confucius.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Following <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hsün</span> is <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-sun Lung</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽung</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-shih</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公孫龍</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">寵</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子石</span>), whose birth is assigned by different writers to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chao</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">趙</span>). He was fifty-three years younger than Confucius. We have the following account:—"<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kung</span> asked <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-shih</span>, saying, 'Have you not learned the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Book of Poetry</i>?' <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-shih</span> replied, 'What leisure have I to do so? My parents require me to be filial; my brothers require me to be submissive; and my friends require me to be sincere. What leisure have I for anything else?' 'Come to my master,' said <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kung</span>, 'and learn of him.'"</p>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien</span> here observes:—"Of the thirty-five disciples which preceded, we have some details. Their age and other particulars are found in the books and records. It is not so, however, in regard to the fifty-two which follow."</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan Chi</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽan</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi-chʽan</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-ta</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">冉季，字子產</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">季產</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子達</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, whose place is the 11th, west, next to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po Chʽien</span>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-tsu Kou-tzǔ</span> or simply <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chih</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公祖勾茲</span> [or simply <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">茲</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子之</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. His tablet is the 23rd, east, in the outer court.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin Tsu</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-nan</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">泰祖，字子南</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span>. His tablet precedes that of the last, two places.</p>
				</li>

				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi-tiao Chʽih</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-lien</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">漆雕哆</span> [<abbr>al</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">侈</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子斂</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. His tablet is the 13th, west.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Kao</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chiao</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顔高字子驕</span>). According to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i>, he was the same was <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Kʽo</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">刻</span>, or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">尅</span>), who drove the carriage when Confucius rode in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> after the duke and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Nan-tzǔ</span>. But this seems doubtful. Other authorities make his name <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽan</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">產</span>), and style him <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-tsing</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子精</span>). His tablet is the 13th, east.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi-tiao Tʽu-fu</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽung</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-yu</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽi</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-wên</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">漆雕徒父</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">從</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子有</span> or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子友</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子期</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子文</span>]), a native of /<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, whose tablet precedes that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi-tiao Chʽih</span>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jang Ssǔ-chʽih</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-tʽu</span>, or <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-tsʽung</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">壤</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">穰</span>] <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">駟赤，字子徒</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子從</span>]), a native <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span>. Some consider <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jang-ssǔ</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">壤駟</span>) to be a double surname. His tabelt comes after that of <abbr>no.</abbr> 40.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shang Chai</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chi</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hsiu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">商澤，字子季</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子秀</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. His tablet is immediately after that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fan Hsü</span>, <abbr>no.</abbr> 26.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih Tso</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chih</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ</span>]-<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">shu</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-ming</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">石作</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">之</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">蜀，字子明</span>). Some take <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih-tso</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">石作</span>) as a double surname. His tablet follows that of <abbr>no.</abbr> 42.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jên Pu-chʽi</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsüan</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">任不齊，字選</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span>, whose tablet is next to that of <abbr>no.</abbr> 28.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-liang Ju</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chêng</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公良孺</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">儒</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子正</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span>, follows the preceding in the temples. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sacrificial Canon</i> says:—<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chêng</span> was a man of worth and bravery. When Confucius was surrounded and stopped in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pʽu</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chêng</span> fought so desperately, that the people of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pʽu</span> were afraid, and let the master go, on his swearing that he would not proceed to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>."</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hou</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih</span>] <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-li</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li-chih</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">后</span> [<abbr>al</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">石</span>] <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">處</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">虔</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子里</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">里之</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>, having his tablet the 17th, east.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin Jan</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽai</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">秦冉，字開</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽai</span>. He is not given in the list of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i>, and on this account his tabelt was put out of the temples in the ninth year of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chia-tsing</span>. It was restored, however, in the second year of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yung-chêng</span>, <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 1724, and is the 33rd, east, in the outer court.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-hsia Shou</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shêng</span> [and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-shêng</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公夏首</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">守</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字乘</span> [and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子乘</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, whose tablet is next to that of <abbr>No</abbr> 44.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsi Yung-tien</span> [or simply <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tien</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hsi</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chien</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽieh</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">奚容箴</span> [or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">點</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子皙</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子偕</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子楷</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, having his tablet the 18th, east.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung Chien-ting</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung Yu</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chung</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公肩</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">堅</span>] <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">定</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公有</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子仲</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">中</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">忠</span>]). His nativity is assigned to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, and to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsin</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">晉</span>). He follows <abbr>no.</abbr> 46.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Tsu</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiang</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiang</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hsiang</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顔祖</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">相</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字襄</span>, and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子襄</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, with his tablet following that of <abbr>no.</abbr> 50.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chiao Tan</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wu</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chia</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鄡單</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">郻</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子家</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. His place is next to that of <abbr>no.</abbr> 51.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chü</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kou</span>] <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsing-chʽiang</span> [and simply <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsing</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽiang</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chieh</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-mêng</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">句</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">勾</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鈎</span>] <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">井疆</span> [and simply <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">井</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子疆</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子界</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子孟</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, following <abbr>no.</abbr> 52.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tasi</span>]-<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">fu Hei</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hei</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-so</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-su</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">罕</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">宰</span>] <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">父黑，字子黑</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子索</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子素</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, whose tablet is next to that of <abbr>no.</abbr> 53.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin Shang</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-pʽei</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pʽei-tzǔ</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pu-tzǔ</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">秦商，字子丕</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">丕兹</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">不兹</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, or, according to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Hsüang</span>, of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽu</span>. He was forty years younger than Confucius. One authority, however, says he was only four years younger, and that his father and Confucius's father were both celebrated for their strength. His tablet is the 12th, east.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shin Tang</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">申黨字周</span>). In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i> there is a <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shin Chi</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chou</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">申績，字子周</span>). The name is given by other as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">堂</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">儻</span>) and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">續</span>), with the designation <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-tsu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子續</span>). These are probably the same person mentioned in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i> as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shin Chʽang</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">申棖</span>). Prior to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ming</span> dynasty they were sacrificed to as two, but in <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 1530, the name <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tang</span> was expunged from the sacrificial list, and only that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽang</span> left. His tablet is the 31st, east.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Chih-pʽo</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-shu</span> [or simply <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顔之僕，字子叔</span> [or simply <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">叔</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, who occupies the 29th place, east.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yung Chʽi</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽi</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-yen</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">榮旂</span> [or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">祈</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子旗</span> or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子祺</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子顔</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, whose tablet is the 20th, west.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsien Chʽêng</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽi</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hung</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">縣成，字子祺</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">子橫</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. His place is the 22nd, east.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tso Jên-ying</span> or [simply <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ying</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsing</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hsing</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">左人郢</span> [or simply <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">郢</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字行</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子行</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. His tablet follows that of <abbr>no.</abbr> 59.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Chi</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">An</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-ssǔ</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">燕伋</span> [or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">級</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字思</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子思</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span>. His tablet is the 24th, east.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Kuo</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-tʽu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鄭國，字子徒</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. This is understood to be the same with the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsieh Pang</span>, styled (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-tsʽung</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">薛邦，字子從</span>), of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i>. His tablet follows <abbr>no.</abbr> 61.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin Fei</span>, styled (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chih</span> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">秦非，字子之</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, having his tablet the 31st, west.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shih Chih-chʽang</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hêng</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">chʽang</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">施之常，字子恆</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">常</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. His tablet is the 30th, east.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Kʽuai</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-shêng</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顔噲，字子聲</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. His tablet is the next to that of <abbr>no.</abbr> 64.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pu Shu-shêng</span> styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽê</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">步叔乘</span> [in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i> we have an old form of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">乘</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子車</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>. Sometimes for <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">步</span>) we find <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shao</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">少</span>). His tablet is the 30th, west.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüan Kʽang</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chi</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">原亢，字子籍</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien</span> calls him <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüan Kʽang-chi</span>, not mentioning any designation. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i> makes him <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüan Kʽang</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">抗</span>), styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chi</span>. His tablet is the 23rd, west.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüeh Kʽo</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsin</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-shêng</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">樂欬</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">欣</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子聲</span>), a native or <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. His tablet is the 25th, east.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lien Chieh</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yung</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-yung</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-tsʽao</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">廉絜，字庸</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子庸</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">子曹</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> or of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>. HIs tablet is next to that of <abbr>no.</abbr> 68.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-chung Hui</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽuai</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽi</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">叔仲會</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">噲</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子期</span>), a native <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>, or, according to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Hsüan</span>, of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsin</span>. He was younger than Confucius by fifty-four years. It is said that he and another youth, called <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung Hsüan</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孔璇</span>), attended by turns with their pencils, and acted as a amanuenses to the sage, and when <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng Wu-po</span> expressed a doubt of their competency, Confucius declared his satisfaction with them. He follows <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lien Chieh</span> in the temples.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Ho</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顔何，字冉</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. The present copies of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i> do not contain this name, and in <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 1588 <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jan</span> was displaced from his place in the temples. His tablet, however, has been restored during the present dynasty. It is the 33rd, west.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ti Hei</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chê</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chê</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chê-chih</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">狄黑，字皙</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子皙</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">皙之</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, or of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. His tablet is the 26th, east.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kuei</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pang</span>] <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sun</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-lien</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-yin</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">邽</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">邦</span>] <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">巽，字子斂</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子飲</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. His tablet is the 27th, west.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung Chung</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-mieh</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孔忠，字子蔑</span>). This was the son, it is said, of Confucius's elder brother, the cripple <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng-pi</span>. His tablet is next to that of <abbr>no.</abbr> 73. His sacrificial title is "the ancient worthy, the philosopher <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mieh</span>."</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-hsi Yü-ju</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yü</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-shang</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公西輿如</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">輿</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子上</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. His place is the 26th, west.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-hsi Tien</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-shang</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公西葴</span> [or <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">點</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子上</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子尚</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. His tablet is the 28th, east.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin Chang</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lao</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kʽai</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">琴張</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">牢</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子開</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>. His tablet is the 29th, west.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên Kʽang</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-kʽang</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽin</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">陳亢，字子亢</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子禽</span>]), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽên</span>. See <cite>notes</cite> on <abbr>Ana.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. </p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsien Tan</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tan-fu</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Fêng</span>], styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hsiang</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">縣亶</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">亶父</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">豐</span>], <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">字子象</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. Some suppose that this is the same as <abbr>no.</abbr> 53. The advisers of the present dynasty in such matters, however, have considered them to be different, and in 1724, a tablet was assigned to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsien Tan</span>, the 34th, west.</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<p>The three preceding names were given in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i>.</p>
			<p>The research of scholars has added about twenty others.</p>
			<ol start="81">
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lin Fang</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chʽiu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">林放，字子邱</span>), a native of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. The only thing known of him is from the <cite><abbr>Ana.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span></cite>. His tablet was displaced under the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ming</span>, but has been restored by the present dynasty. It is the first, west.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chü Yüan</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Po-yü</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">蘧瑗，伯玉</span>), an officer of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, and, as appears from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mencius</i>, an intimate friend of Confucius. Still his tablet has shared the same changes as that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lin Fang</span>. It is not the first, east.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shên Chʽang</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">申棖</span>). See <abbr>no.</abbr> 57.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shên Tʽang</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">申堂</span>). See <abbr>no.</abbr> 57.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mu Pʽi</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">牧皮</span>), mentioned by <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mencius</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <abbr>pt.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span> 4. His entrance into the temple has been under the present dynasty. His tablet is the 34th, east.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tso Chʽiu-ming</span> or <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tso-chʽiu Ming</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">左丘明</span>) has the 32nd place, east. His title was fixed in <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 1530 to be—"the ancient scholar," but in 1642 it was raised to that of "ancient worthy." To him we owe the most distinguished of the annotated editions of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽun Chʽiu</i>. But whether he really was a disciple of COnfucius, and in personal communication with him, is much debated.</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<p>The above are the only names and surnames of those of the disciples who now share in the sacrifices to the sage. Those who wish to exhaust the subject, mention in addition, on the authority of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tso Chʽiu-ming</span>, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chung-sun Ho-chi</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仲孫何忌</span>), a son of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng Hsi</span> (see the <cite>prolegomena chapter 3 section 1</cite>), and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chung-sun Shuo</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">仲孫説</span>), also a son of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng Hsi</span>, supposed by many to be the same with <abbr>no.</abbr> 17; <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ju Pei</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孺悲</span>), mentioned in the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span></cite>, and in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Chi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span> <abbr>sect.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 22; <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kung-wang Chi-chʽiu</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">公罔之裘</span>) and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsü Tien</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">序點</span>), mentioned in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Chi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIII</span> 7; <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pin-mou Chia</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">賓牟賈</span>), mentioned in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Chi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 15; <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung Hsüan</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">孔璇</span>) and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hui Shu-lan</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">惠叔蘭</span>), on the authority of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of the School</i>; <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽang Chi</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">常季</span>), mentioned by Zhuangzi; <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chü Yü</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鞫語</span>), mentioned by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen-tzǔ</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">晏子</span>); <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lien Yü</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">廉瑀</span>) and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu Chün</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">魯峻</span>), on the authority of <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">文翁石室</span>; and finally <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-fu Ho</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子服何</span>), the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-fu Ching-po</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子服景伯</span>) of the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxviii</span></cite>.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
