<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Prolegomena Chapter II Section II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="prolegomena-chapter-2-section-2" epub:type="introduction">
			<hgroup>
				<h5>
					<span epub:type="title">Section</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h5>
				<h6 epub:type="subtitle">At What Time, and by Whom, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i> Were Written; Their Plan; and Authenticity.</h6>
			</hgroup>
			<p>At the commencement of the notes upon the first book, under the heading, "The Title of the Work," I have given the received account of its authorship, which preceded the catalogue of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Hsin</span>. According to that, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i> were compiled by the disciples of Confucius coming together after his death, and digesting the memorials of his discourses and conversations which they had severally preserved. But this cannot be true. We may believe, indeed, that many of the disciples put on record conversations which they had had with their master, and notes about his manners and incidents of his life, and that these have been incorporated with the work which we have, but that work must have taken its present form at a period somewhat later.</p>
			<p>In Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, chapters <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span></cite> and <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span></cite>, we have some notices of the last days of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng Shên</span>, and are told that he was visited on his deathbed by the officer <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mêng Ching</span>. Now <em><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</span></em> was the posthumous title of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chung-sun Chieh</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1446" id="noteref-1446" epub:type="noteref">1446</a> and we find him alive (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Chi</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>Pt.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 2) after the death of duke <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao</span> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>,\<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1447" id="noteref-1447" epub:type="noteref">1447</a> which took place <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 431, about fifty years after the death of Confucius.</p>
			<p>Again, <cite>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span> is all occupied with the sayings of the disciples. Confucius personally does not appear in it. Parts of it, as chapters <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span></cite>, <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span></cite>, and <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span></cite>, carry us down to a time when the disciples had schools and followers of their own, and were accustomed to sustain their teachings by referring to the lessons which they had heard from the sage.</p>
			<p>Thirdly, there is the <cite>second chapter</cite> of Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>, the second paragraph of which is evidently a note by the compilers of the work, enumerating ten of the principal disciples, and classifying them according to their distinguishing characteristics. We can hardly suppose it to have been written while any of the ten were alive. But there is among them the name of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-hsia</span>, who lived to the age of about a hundred. We find him, <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 407, three-quarters of a century after the death of Confucius, at the court of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span>, to the prince of which he is reported to have presented some of the classical books.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1448" id="noteref-1448" epub:type="noteref">1448</a></p>
			<p>We cannot therefore accept the above account of the origin of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>,—that they were compiled by the disciples of COnfucius. Much more likely is the view that we owe the work to their disciples. In the note on <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 1</cite>, a peculiarity is pointed out in the use of the surnames of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yu Jo</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsêng Shên</span>, which has made some Chines critics attribute the compilation to their followers. But this conclusion does not stand investigation. Others have assigned different portions to different schools. Thus <cite>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span></cite> is given to the disciples of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-king</span>; <cite>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span></cite>, to those of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Min Tzǔ-chien</span>; <cite>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span></cite>, to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüan Hsien</span>; and <cite>Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span></cite> has been supposed to be interpolated from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span></i>. Even if we were to acquiesce in these decisions, we should have accounted only for a small part of the work. It is best to rest in the general conclusion, that it was compiled by the disciples of the disciples of the sage, making free use of the written memorials concerning him which they had received, and the oral statements which they had heard, from their several masters. And we shall not be far wrong, if we determine its date as about the end of the fourth, or the beginning of the fifth century before Christ.</p>
			<p>In the critical work on the Four Books, called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Record of Remarks in the Village of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Jung</span></i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1449" id="noteref-1449" epub:type="noteref">1449</a> it is observe. "The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>, in my opinion, were made by the disciples, just like this records of remarks. There they were recorded, and afterwards came a first-rate hand, who gave them the beautiful literary finish which we now witness, so that there is not a character which does not have its own indispensable place."<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1450" id="noteref-1450" epub:type="noteref">1450</a> We have seen that the first of these statements contains only a small amount of truth with regard to the materials of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>, nor can we receive the second. If one hand or one mind had digested the materials provided by many, the arrangement and the style of the work would have been different. We should not have had the same remark appearing in several books, with little variation, and sometimes with none at all. Nor can we account on this supposition for such fragments as the last chapters of the <cite>ninth</cite>, <cite>tenth</cite>, and <cite>sixteenth</cite> Books, and many others. No definite plan has been kept in view throughout. A degree of unity appears to belong to some Books more than others, and in general to the first ten more than to those which follows, but there is no progress of thought or illustration of subject from book to book. And even in those where the chapters have a common subject, they are thrown together at random more than on any plan.</p>
			<p>We cannot tell when the work was first called the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yü</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1451" id="noteref-1451" epub:type="noteref">1451</a> The evidence in the preceding section is sufficient to prove that when the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> scholars were engaged in collecting the ancient books, it came before them, not in broken tablets, but complete, and arranged in books, or sections, as we now have it. The old copy was found deposited in the wall of the house which Confucius had occupied, and must have been placed there not later than <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 211, distant from the date which I have assigned to the compilation, not much more than a century and a half. That copy, written in the most ancient characters, was, possibly, the autograph of the compilers.</p>
			<p>We have the writings, or portions of the writings, of several authors of the third and fourth centuries before Christ. Of these, in addition to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Great Learning</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Doctrines of the Mean</i>, and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Works of Mencius</i>, I have looked over the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Works <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsün Chʽing</span></i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1452" id="noteref-1452" epub:type="noteref">1452</a> of the orthodox school, of the philosophers <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">Chuang</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lieh</span> of the Taoist school,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1453" id="noteref-1453" epub:type="noteref">1453</a> and the heresiarch <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mo</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1454" id="noteref-1454" epub:type="noteref">1454</a></p>
			<p>In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Great Learning, Commentary</i>, chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, we have the words of <cite><abbr>Ana.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span></cite>. In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Doctrines of the Mean</i>, <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, we have <cite><abbr>Ana.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span></cite>; and in <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span> 5, we have substantially <cite><abbr>Ana.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span></cite>. In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mencius</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>Pt.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 19, we have <cite><abbr>Ana.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span></cite>, and in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 2, <cite><abbr>Ana.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span></cite>; in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <abbr>Pr.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 11, <cite><abbr>Ana.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span></cite>, <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span></cite>; in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> <abbr>Pt.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span> 1, <cite><abbr>Ana.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>2</cite>; in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <abbr>Pt.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 9, <cite><abbr>Ana.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span> 4</cite>; and in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <abbr>Pt.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span> 1, 2, 8, <cite><abbr>Ana.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span></cite>, <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span></cite>, and <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span></cite>. These quotations, however, are introduced by "The master said," or "Confucius said," no mention being made of any book called the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yü</i>, or <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>. In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Great Learning, Commentary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 15, we have the words of <cite><abbr>Ana.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span></cite>, and in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mencius</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <abbr>Pt.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 3, those of <cite><abbr>Ana.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span></cite>, but without any notice of quotation.</p>
			<p>In the writings of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsün Chʽing</span>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> page 2, we find something like the words of <cite><abbr>Ana.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span></cite>; and on <abbr>p.</abbr> 6, part of <cite><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span></cite>. But in these instances there is no mark of quotation.</p>
			<p>In the writings of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang</span>, I have noted only one passage where the words of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i> are reproduced. <cite><abbr>Ana.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span></cite> is found, but with large additions, and no reference of quotation, in his treatise on "Man in the world, associated with other man."<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1455" id="noteref-1455" epub:type="noteref">1455</a> In all those works, as well as in those of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lieh</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mo</span>, the references to Confucius and his disciples, and to many circumstances of his life, are numerous.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1456" id="noteref-1456" epub:type="noteref">1456</a> The quotations of sayings of his not found in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i> are likewise many, especially in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Doctrine of the Mean</i>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mencius</i>, and in the works of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chuang</span>. Those in the latter are mostly burlesque, but hose by the orthodox writers have more or less classical authority. Some of them may be found in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chia Yü</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1457" id="noteref-1457" epub:type="noteref">1457</a> or <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i>, and in parts of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Li Chi</i>, while others are only known to us by their occurrence in these writers. Altogether, they do not supply the evidence, for which I am in quest, of the existence of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i> as a distinct work, bearing the name of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yü</i>, prior to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽin</span> dynasty. They leave the presumption, however, in favour of those conclusions, which arises from the facts stated in the first section, undisturbed. They confirm it rather. They show that there was abundance of materials at hand to the scholars of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span>, to compile a much larger work with the same title, if they had felt it their duty to do the business of compilation, and not that of editing.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
