<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Prolegomena Chapter II Section I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="prolegomena-chapter-2-section-1" epub:type="introduction">
			<hgroup>
				<h5>
					<span epub:type="title">Section</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h5>
				<h6 epub:type="subtitle">Formation of the Text of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i> by the Scholars of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> Dynasty.</h6>
			</hgroup>
			<p>When the work of collecting and editing the remains of the classical books was undertaken by the scholars of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span>, there appeared two different copies of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>, one of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> the native state of Confucius, and the other from <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>, the state adjoining. Between these there were considerable differences. The former consisted of twenty books or chapters, the same as those into which the classic is now divided. The latter contained two books in addition, and in the twenty books, which they had in common, the chapters and sentences were somewhat more numerous than in the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> exemplar.</p>
			<p>The names of several individuals are given, who devoted themselves to the study of those two copies of the Classic. Among the patrons of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> copy are mentioned the names of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsia-hou Shêng</span>, grand-tutor of the heir-apparent, who died at the age of 90, and in the reign of the emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsüan</span> (<abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 73–49);<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1431" id="noteref-1431" epub:type="noteref">1431</a> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiao Wang-chih</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1432" id="noteref-1432" epub:type="noteref">1432</a> a general-officer, who died in the reign of the emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüan</span> (<abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 48–33); <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei Hsien</span>, who was premier of the empire from <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 70–66; and his son <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsüan-chʽêng</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1433" id="noteref-1433" epub:type="noteref">1433</a> As patrons of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> copy, we have <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Chʽing</span>, who was a censor in the year <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 99;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1434" id="noteref-1434" epub:type="noteref">1434</a> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yung Shêng</span>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1435" id="noteref-1435" epub:type="noteref">1435</a> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Chi</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1436" id="noteref-1436" epub:type="noteref">1436</a> a statesman who died in the beginning of the reign of the emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüan</span>.</p>
			<p>But a third copy of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i> was discovered about <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 150. One of the sons of emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</span> was appointed king of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1437" id="noteref-1437" epub:type="noteref">1437</a> in the year <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 154, and sometime after, wishing to enlarge his palace, he proceeded to pull down the house of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung</span> family, known as that where Confucius himself had lived. While doing so, there were found in the wall copies of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-ching</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽun Chʽiu</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiao-ching</i>, and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yü</i> or <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>, which had been deposited there, when the edict for the burning of the books was issued. They were all written, however, in the most ancient form of the Chinese character,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1438" id="noteref-1438" epub:type="noteref">1438</a> which had fallen into disuse, and the king returned them to the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung</span> family, the head of which, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung An-kuo</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1439" id="noteref-1439" epub:type="noteref">1439</a> gave himself to the study of them, and finally, in obedience to an imperial order, published a work called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yü</span>, with Explanations of the Characters, and Exhibition of the Meaning</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1440" id="noteref-1440" epub:type="noteref">1440</a></p>
			<p>The recovery of this copy will be seen to be a most important circumstance in the history of the text of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>. It is referred by Chinese writers, as "The old <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yü</i>." In the historical narrative which we have of the affair, a circumstance is added which may appear to some minds to throw suspicion on the whole account. The king was finally arrested, we are told, in his purpose to destroy the house, by hearing the sounds of bells, musical stones, lutes, and citherns, as he was ascending the steps that led to the ancestral hall or temple. This incident was contrived, we may suppose, by the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung</span> family, to preserve the house, or it may have been devised by the historian to glorify the sage, but we may not, on account of it, discredit the funding of the ancient copies of the books. We have <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung An-kuo's</span> own account of their being committed to him, and of the ways which he took to decipher them. The work upon the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>, mentioned above, has not indeed come down to us, but his labours on the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-ching</i> still remain.</p>
			<p>It has been already stated, that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yü</i> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> contained two books more than that of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span>. In this respect, the old <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yü</i> agreed with the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> exemplar. Those two books were wanting in it as well. The last book of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu Lun</i> was divided in it, however, into two, the chapter beginning, "<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yao</span> said," forming a whole book by itself, and the remaining two chapters formed another book beginning "<span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ-chang</span>." With this trifling difference, the old and the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> copies appear to have agreed together.</p>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chang Yü</span>, prince of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">An-chʽang</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1441" id="noteref-1441" epub:type="noteref">1441</a> who died <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 4, after having sustained several of the highest offices of the empire, instituted a comparison between the exemplars of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span>, with a view to determine the true text. The result of his labours appeared in twenty-one books, which are mentioned in <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Hsin's</span> catalogue. They were known as the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun</span> of prince <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chang</span>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1442" id="noteref-1442" epub:type="noteref">1442</a> and commanded general approbation. To <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chang Yü</span> is commonly ascribed the ejecting from the classic the two additional books which the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> exemplar contained, but <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ma Tuan-lin</span> prefers to rest that circumstance on the authority of the old <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun</i>, which we have seen was without them.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1443" id="noteref-1443" epub:type="noteref">1443</a> If we had the two books, we might find sufficient reason from their contents to discredit the. That may have been sufficient for <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chang Yü</span> to condemn them as he did, but we can hardly suppose that he did not have before him the old <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun</i>, which had come to light about a century before he published his work.</p>
			<p>In the course of the second century, a new edition of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>, with a commentary, was published by one of the greatest scholars which China has ever produced, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Hsüan</span>, known also as <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chêng Kʽang-chʽêng</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1444" id="noteref-1444" epub:type="noteref">1444</a> He died in the reign of the emperor <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsien</span> (<abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 190–220)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1445" id="noteref-1445" epub:type="noteref">1445</a> at the age of 74, and the amount of his labours on the ancient classical literature is almost incredible. While he adopted the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lu Lun</i> as the received text of his time, he compared it minutely with those of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽi</span> and the old exemplar. In the last section of this chapter will be found a list of the readings in his commentary different from hose which are now acknowledged in deference to the authority of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>, of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Sung</span> dynasty. They are not many, and their importance is but trifling.</p>
			<p>On the whole, the above statements will satisfy the reader of the care with which the text of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yü</i> was fixed during the dynasty of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span>.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
