<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Prolegomena Chapter IV Section I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="prolegomena-chapter-4-section-2" epub:type="introduction">
			<hgroup>
				<h5>
					<span epub:type="title">Section</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h5>
				<h6 epub:type="subtitle">Translations and Other Works</h6>
			</hgroup>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Confucius Sinarum Philosophus</i>; <i xml:lang="la">sive</i> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Scientia Sinensis Latine Exposita</i>. <span xml:lang="la">Studio et Opera Prosperi Intorcetta</span>, <span xml:lang="de">Christiani Herdritch</span>, Francisci Rougemont, <span xml:lang="fr">Philippi Couplet</span>, <span xml:lang="la">Patrum Societatis <abbr>Jesu.</abbr> Jussus Ludovici Magni</span>. <span xml:lang="la">Parisiis</span>, 1837.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Works of Confucius; Containing the Original Text, with a Translation</i>. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. By <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Marshman. Serampore, 1809. This is only a fragment of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Works of Confucius</i>.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Four Books; Translated into English</i>, by <abbr>Rev.</abbr> David Collie, of the London Missionary Society. Malacca, 1828.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">L'Invariable Milieu; Ouvrage Moral de Tseu-sse, en Chinois et en Manduchou, avec une Version Littérale Latine, une Traduction Françoise, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> <span xml:lang="fr">Par <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Abel-Rémusat</span>. <span xml:lang="fr">A Paris</span>, 1817.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Ta Hio, ou La Grande Étude; Traduit en François, avec une Version Latine, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> <span xml:lang="fr">Par <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Pauthier</span>. Paris, 1837.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Y-king; Autiquissimus Sinarum Liber</i>, <i xml:lang="la">quem ex</i> <span xml:lnag="la">Latina Interpretatione <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Regis</span>, <i xml:lang="la">aliorumque ex</i> <span xml:lang="la"><abbr>Soc.</abbr> Jesu <abbr>PP.</abbr></span> <i xml:lang="la">edidit</i> <span xml:lang="la">Julius Mohl</span>. <span xml:lang="la">Stuttgartiae et Tubingae</span>, 1839.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Mémoires Concernant L'Histoire, Les Sciences, Les Arts, Les Mœurs, Les Usages, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, des Chinois</i>. <i xml:lang="fr">Par</i> <span xml:lang="fr">Les Missionaires de Pêkin</span>. <span xml:lang="fr">A Paris</span>, 1776–1814.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire Générale de La Chine; ou Annales de cet Empire</i>. <i xml:lang="fr">Traduites du</i> <span xml:lang="fr">Tong-Kien-Kang-Mou</span>. <span xml:lang="fr">Par le feu Père Joseph-Annie-Marie de Moyriac de Mailla</span>, <span xml:lang="fr">Jesuite François</span>, <span xml:lang="fr">Missionaire à Pekin</span>. <span xml:lang="fr">A Paris</span>, 1776–1785.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Notitia Linguae Sinicae</i>. <i xml:lang="la">Auctore</i> <span xml:lang="fr"><abbr>P.</abbr> Prémare</span>. <span xml:lang="la">Malaccae</span>, <i xml:lang="la">cura</i> <span xml:lang="la">Academiae Anglo-Sinensis</span>, 1831.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Chinese Repository</i>. Canton, China, 20 <abbr>vols.</abbr>, 1832–1851.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Dictionnaire des Noms, Anciens et Modernes, des Villes et Arrondissements de Premier, Deuxième, et Troisième ordre, compris dans L'Empire Chinoius, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> <i xml:lang="fr">Par</i> <span xml:lang="fr">Édouard Biot, Membre du Conseil de la Société Asiatique</span>. Paris, 1842.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Chinese</i>. By John Francis Davis, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, <abbr>F.R.S.</abbr>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> In two volumes. London, 1836.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">China: Its State and Prospects</i>. By <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Medhurst, <abbr>D.D.</abbr>, of the London Missionary Society. London, 1838.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">L'Univers: Histoire et Déscription des tous les Peuples</i>. <span xml:lang="fr">Chine</span>. <i xml:lang="fr">Par</i> <span xml:lang="fr"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. G.</abbr> Pauthier</span>. Paris, 1838. </p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of China, from the Earliest Records to the Treaty with Great Britain in 1842</i>. By Thomas Thornton, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, member of the Royal Asiatic Society. In two volumes. London, 1844.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Middle Kingdom: A Survey of the Geography, Government, Education, Social LIfe, Arts, Religion, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, of the Chinese Empire</i>. By <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Wells Williams, <abbr class="eoc">LL.D.</abbr> In two volumes. New York and London, 1848. The second edition, revised, 1883.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Religious Condition of the Chinese</i>. By <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Joseph Edkins, <abbr>B.A.</abbr>, of the London Missionary Society. London, 1859.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Christ and Other Masters</i>. By Charles Hardwick, <abbr>M.A.</abbr>, Christian Advocate in the University of Cambridge. Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Religions of China, America, and Oceanica</i>. Cambridge, 1858.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Introduction to the Study of Chinese Characters</i>. By <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Edkins, <abbr class="eoc">D.D.</abbr> London, 1876.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Structure of Chinese Characters, Under 300 Primary Forms</i>. By John Chalmers, <abbr>M.A.</abbr>, <abbr class="eoc">LL.D.</abbr> Aberdeen, 1882.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
