<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Prolegomena Chapter IV Section I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="prolegomena-chapter-4-section-1" epub:type="introduction">
			<hgroup>
				<h5>
					<span epub:type="title">Section</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h5>
				<h6 epub:type="subtitle">Chinese Works, with Brief Notices</h6>
			</hgroup>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">十三經註疏</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Thirteen <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching</span>, with Commentary and Explanations</i>. This is the great repertory of ancient lore upon the classics. On the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>, it contains the "Collection of Explanations of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lun Yü</i>," by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ho Yen</span> and others (see the <cite>prolegomena chapter 2 section 3</cite>), and "The Correct Meaning," or "Paraphrase of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsing Ping</span>" (see the <cite>prolegomena chapter 2 section 3</cite>).</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">新刻批點四書讀本</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A New Edition of the Four Books, Punctuated and Annotated, for Reading</i>. This work was published in the seventh year of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tao-kuang</span> (1837) by a <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kao Lin</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">高琳</span>). It is the finest edition of the four books which I have seen, in point of typographical execution. It is indeed a volume for reading. It contains the ordinary <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collected Comments</i> of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> on the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>, and his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Chapters and Sentences</i> of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Great Learning</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Doctrine of the Mean</i>. The editor's own notes are at the top and bottom of the page, in rubric</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書朱子本義匯參</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Proper Meaning of the Four Books as Determined by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>, Compared with, and Illustrated from, Other Commentators</i>. This is a most voluminous work, published in the tenth year of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien-lung</span>, <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 1745, by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Pu-chʽing</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">王步青</span>), a member of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han-lin</span> College.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書經註集證</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Four Books, Text and Commentary, with Proofs and Illustrations</i>. The copy of this work which I have was edited by a <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Tʽing-chi</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">汪廷機</span>), in the third year of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chia-ching</span>, <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 1798. It may be called a commentary on the commentary. The research in all matters of geography, history, biography, natural history, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, is immense.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書諸儒輯要</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Collection of the Most Important Comments of Scholars on the Four Books</i>. By <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Pʽei-lin</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">李沛霖</span>); published in the fifty-seventh <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-hsi</span> year, <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 1718. This work is about as voluminous as the <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">匯參</span>, but on a different plan. Every chapter is preceded by a critical discussion of its general meaning, and the logical connection of its several paragraphs. This is followed by the text, and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi's</span> standard commentary. We have then a paraphrase, full and generally perspicuous. Next, there is a selection of approved comments, from a great variety of authors; and finally, the reader find a number of critical remarks and ingenious views, differing often from the common interpretation, which are submitted for his examination.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書翼註論文</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Supplemental Commentary, and Literary Discussions, on the Four Books</i>. By <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chang Chên-tʽao</span> [<abbr>al</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽi-an</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">張甄陶</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">惕庵</span>]), a member of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han-li</span> College, in the early part, apparently, of the reign of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien-lung</span>. The work is on a peculiar plan. The reader is supposed to be acquainted with <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi's</span> commentary, which is not given; but the author generally supports his views, and defends them against the criticisms of some of the early scholar of this dynasty. His own exercitations are of the nature of essays more than of commentary. It is a book for the student who is somewhat advanced, rather than for the learner. I have often perused it with interest and advantage.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書遵註合講</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Four Books, According to the Commentary, with Paraphrase</i>. Published in the eighth year of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yung Chêng</span>, <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 1730, by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wêng Fu</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽeh-fu</span>] (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">翁復</span> [<abbr>al.</abbr> <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">克夫</span>]). Every page is divided into two parts. Below, we have the text and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi's</span> commentary. Above, we have an analysis of every chapter, followed by a paraphrase of the several paragraphs. To the paraphrase of each paragraph are subjoined critical notes, digested from a great variety of scholars, but without the mention of their names. A list of 116 is given who are thus laid under contribution. In addition, there are maps and illustrative figures at the commencement; and to each book there are prefixed biographical notices, explanations of peculiar allusions, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">新增四書補註附考備旨</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Four Books, with a Complete Digest of Supplements to the Commentary, and Additional Suggestions. A New Edition, with Additions</i>. By <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tu Ting-chi</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">杜定基</span>). Published in <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 1779. The original of this work was by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Têng Lin</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">鄧林</span>), a scholar of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ming</span> dynasty. It is perhaps the best of all editions of the four books for a learner. Each page is divided into three parts. Below, is the text divided into sentences and members of sentences, which are followed by short glosses. The text is followed by the usual commentary, and that by a paraphrase, to which are subjoined the supplements and suggestions. The middle division contains a critical analysis of the chapters and paragraphs; and above, there are the necessary biographical and other notes.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書味根錄</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Four Books, with the Relish of the Radical Meaning</i>. This is a new work, published in 1852. It is the production of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chin Chʽêng</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽiu-tʽan</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">金澂，字秋潭</span>), an officer and scholar, who, returning, apparently to Canton province, from the north in 1836, occupied his retirement with reviewing his literary studies of former years, and employed his sons to transcribe his notes. The writer is fully up in all the commentaries on the classics, and pays particular attention to the labours of the scholars of the present dynasty. To the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>, for instance, there is prefixed <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chang Yung's</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Confucius</i>, with criticisms on it by the author himself. Each chapter is preceded by a critical analysis. Then follows the text with the standard commentary, carefully divided into sentences, often with glosses, original and selected, between them. The the commentary there succeeds a paraphrase, which is not copied by the author from those of his predecessors. After the paraphrase we have explanations (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">解</span>). The book is beautifully printed, and in small type, so that it is really a multum in parvo, with considerable freshness.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">日講四書義解</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Paraphrase for Daily Lessons, Explaining the Meaning of the Four Books</i>. This work was produced in 1677, by a department of the members of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han-li</span> College, in obedience to an imperial rescript. The paraphrase is full, perspicuous, and elegant.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">御製周易折中</span>; <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">書經傳説彚纂</span>; <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">詩經傳説彚纂</span>; <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">禮記義疏</span>; <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">春秋傳説彚纂</span>. These works form together a superb edition of the five <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">ching</span>, published by imperial authority in the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-hsi</span> and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yung-chêng</span> reigns. They contain the standard views (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">傳</span>); various opinions (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">説</span>); critical decisions of the editors (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">晏</span>); prolegomena; plates or cuts; and other apparatus for the students.</p>
			<p><span xml:lang="zh-Hant">毛西河先生全集</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Collected Writings of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mao Hsi-ho</span></i>. See <cite>prolegomena, chapter 2 section 3</cite>. The voluminousness of his writings is understated there. Of <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">經集</span>, or <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Writings on the Classics</i>, there are 236 sections, while his <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">文集</span>, or <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Other Literary Compositions</i>, amount to 257 sections. His treatises on the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Great Learning</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Doctrine of the Mean</i> have been especially helpful to me. He is a great opponent of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span>, and would be a much more effective one, if he possessed the same graces of style as that "prince of literature."</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書拓餘説</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Collection of Supplemental Observations on the Four Books</i>. The preface of the author, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽao Chih-shêng</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">曹之升</span>), is dated in 1795, the last year of the reign of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien-lung</span>. The work contains what we may call prolegomena on each of the four books, and then excursus on the most difficult and disputed passages. The tone is moderate, and the learning displayed extensive and solid. The views of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Hsi</span> are frequently well defended from the assaults of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Mao Hsi-ho</span>. I have found the work very instructive.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">鄉黨圖考</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">On the Tenth Book of the Analects, with Plates</i>. This work was published by the author, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chiang Yung</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">江永</span>), in the twenty-first <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien-lung</span> year, <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 1761, when he was seventy-six years old. It is devoted to the illustration of the above portion of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>, and is divided into ten sections, the first of which consists of woodcuts and tables. The second contains the "Life of Confucius", of which I have largely avoid myself in the preceding chapter. The whole is a remarkable specimen of the minute care with which Chinese scholars have illustrated the Classical books.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書釋地</span>; <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書釋地續</span>; <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書釋地又續</span>; <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">四書釋地三續</span>. We may call these volumes—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Topography of the Four Books; with Three Supplements</i>. The author's name is <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yen Zo-chʽü</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">閻若璩</span>). The first volume was published in 1698, and the second in 1700. I have not been able to find the dates of the publication of the other two, in which there is more biographical and general matter than topographical. The author apologizes for the inappropriateness of their titles by saying that he could not help calling them supplements to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Topography</i>, which was his "first love."</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">皇清經解</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Explanations of the Classics, under the Imperial <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tsʽing</span> Dynasty</i>. See the <cite>prolegomena, chapter 2, section 3</cite>. The work, however, was not published, as I have there supposed, by imperial authority, but under the superintendence, and at the expense (aided by other officers), of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüan Yüan</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">阮元</span>), governor-general of Guangdong and Guangxi, in the ninth year of the last reign, 1829. The publication of so extensive a work shows a public spirit and zeal for literature among the high officers of China, which should keep foreigners from thinking meanly of them.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">孔子家語</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sayings of the Confucian Family</i>. Family is to be taken in the sense of sect or school. In <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Hsin's</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Catalogue</i>, in the subdivision devoted to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadeg">Lun Yü</i>, we find the entry:—"Sayings of the Confucian Family, Twenty-Seven Books," with a note by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ten Ssǔ-ku</span> of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> dynasty,—"Not the existing work called the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Family Syaings</i>." The original work was among the treasures found in the wall of COnfucius's old house, and was deciphered and edited by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽung An-kuo</span>. The present work by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Su</span> of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wei</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">魏</span>) dynasty, grounded professedly on the older one, the blocks of which had suffered great dilapidation during the intervening centuries. It is allowed also, that, since <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Su's</span> time, the work has suffered more than any of the acknowledged classics. Yet it is a very valuable fragment of antiquity, and it would be worth while to incorporate it with the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analects</i>. My copy is the edition of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Li Yung</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">李容</span>), published in 1780. I have generally called the work <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narratives of the School</i>.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">聖廟祀典圖考</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sacrificial Canon of the Sage's Temples, with Plates</i>. This work, published in 1826, by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ku Yüan</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsiang-chou</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">顧沅，字湘舟</span>), is a very painstaking account of all the names sacrificed to in the temples of Confucius, the dates of their attaining to that honour, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> There are appended to it <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Confucius and Mencius</i>, which are not of so much value.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">十子全書</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Complete Works of the Ten <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tzǔ</span></i>. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Morrison's Dictionary</i>, under the character <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">子</span>. I have only had occasion, in connection with this work, to refer to the writings of Zhuangzi (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">莊子</span>), and <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Lieh-tzǔ</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">列子</span>). My copy is an edition of 1804.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">歷代名賢列女氏姓譜</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Cyclopaedia of Surnames, or Biographical Dictionary, of the Famous Men and Virtuous Women of the Successive Dynasty</i>. This is a very notable work of its class; published in 1793, by <span xml:lang="zh-Hant">蕭智漢</span>, and extending through 157 chapters or books.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">文獻通考</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">General Examination of Records and Scholars</i>. This astonishing work, which cost its author, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ma Tuan-lin</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">馬端臨</span>), twenty years' labour, was first published in 1321. <span xml:lang="fr">Rémusat</span> says—"This excellent work is a library in itself, and if Chinese literature possessed no other, the language would be worth learning for the sake of reading this alone." It does indeed display all but incredible research into every subject connected with the government, history, literature, religion, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, of the empire of China. The author's researches are digested in 348 books. I have had occasion to consult principally those on the literary monuments, embraced in the seventy-six books, from 174th to the 249th.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">朱彝尊經義考</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">An Examination of the Commentaries on the Classics</i>, by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chu Yi-tsun</span>. The author was a member of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han-li</span> College, and the work was first published with an imperial preface by the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽien-lung</span> emperor. It is an exhaustive work on the literature of the classics, in 300 chapters or books.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">續文獻通考</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Continuation of the General Examination of Records and Scholars</i>. This work, which is in 254 books, and nearly as extensive as the former, was the production of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Chʽi</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">王圻</span>), who dates his preface in 1586, the fourteenth year of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wan-li</span>, the style of the reign of the fourteenth emperor of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ming</span> dynasty. <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wang Chʽi</span> brings down the work of his predecessor to his own times. He also frequently goes over the same ground, and puts things in a clearer light. I have found this to be the case in the chapters on the classical and other books.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">二十四史</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Twenty-four Histories</i>. These are the imperially-authorized records of the empire, commencing with the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historical Records</i>, the work of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien</span>, and ending with the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ming</span> Dynasty</i>, which appeared in 1742, the result of the joint labours of 145 officers and scholars of the present dynasty. The extent of the collection may be understood from this, that my copy, bound in English fashion, makes sixty-three volumes, each one larger than this. No nation has a history so thoroughly digested; and on the whole it is trustworthy. In preparing this volume, my necessities have been confined mostly to the works of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ssǔ-ma Chʽien</span>, and his successor, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pan Ku</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">班固</span>), the historian of the first <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Han</span> dynasty.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">歷代統記表</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Annals of the Nation</i>. Published by imperial authority in 1803, the eighth year of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chʽia-chʽing</span>. This work is invaluable to a student, being, indeed, a collection of chronological tables, where every year, form the rise of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chou</span> dynasty, <abbr class="era">BC</abbr> 1121, has a distinct column to itself, in which, in different compartments, the most important events are noted. Beyond that date, it ascend to the nearly the commencement of the cycles in the sixty-first year of <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huang-ti</span>, giving—not every year, but the years of which anything has been mentioned in history. From <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Huang-ti</span> also, it ascends through the dateless ages up to <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pʽan-ku</span>, the first of the mortal sovereigns.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">歷代疆域表</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Boundaries of the Nation in the Successive Dynasties</i>. This work by the same author, and published in 1817, does for the boundaries of the empire the same service which the preceding renders to its chronology.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">歷代沿革表</span>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Topography of the Nation in the Successive Dynasties</i>. Another work by the same author, and of the same date as the preceding.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The dictionaries chiefly consulted have been:—</p>
			<p>The well-known <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shuo Wên</i> (<span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">說文解字</span>), by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsü Shên</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shu-chung</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">許愼，字叔重</span>), published in <abbr class="era">AD</abbr> 100; with the supplement (<span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">繫傳</span>) by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Hsü Chʽieh</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">徐鍇</span>), of the southern <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tʽang</span> dynasty. The characters are arranged in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shuo Wên</i> under 540 keys or radicals, as they are unfortunately termed.</p>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Liu Shu Ku</i> (<span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">六書故</span>), by <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Tai Tʽung</span>, styled <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Chung-ta</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">戴侗，字仲達</span>), of our thirteenth century. The characters are arranged in it, somewhat after the fashion of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Êrh Ya</i> (<cite>prolegomena, chapter 1, section 1</cite>), under six general divisions, which again are subdivided, according to the affinity of subjects, into various categories.</p>
			<p>The <span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">Tzǔ Hui</span> (<span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">字彚</span>), which appeared in the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Wan-li</span> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">萬歷</span>) reign of the <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ming</span> dynasty (1573–1619). The 540 radicals of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Shuo Wên</i> were reduced in this to 214, at which number they have since continued.</p>
			<p>The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-hsi Tzǔ Tien</span> (<span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">康熙字典</span>), or <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-hsi</span> Dictionary</i>, prepared by order of the great <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-hsi</span> emperor in 1716. This is the most common and complete of all Chinese dictionaries for common use.</p>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yi Wên Pi Lan</i> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">蓺文備覽</span>), <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Complete Exhibition of All the Authorized Characters</i>, published in 1787; "furnishing," says <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams, "good definitions of all common characters, whose ancient forms are explained."</p>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Pei Wên Yun Fu</i> (<span epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Hant">佩文韻府</span>), generally known among foreigners as <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-hsi</span> Thesaurus</i>. It was undertaken by an imperial order, and published in 1711, being probably, as Wylie says, "the most extensive work of a lexicographical character ever produced." It does for the phraseology of Chinese literature all, and more than all, that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Kʽang-hsi</span> Dictionary</i> does for the individual characters. The arrangement of the characters is according to their tones and final sounds. My copy of it, with a supplement published about ten years later, is in forty-five large volumes, with much more letterpress in it than the edition of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dynastic Histories</i> mentioned <cite>above</cite>.</p>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Ching Tsi Tsuan Ku Ping Pu Wei</i> (<span xml:lang="zh-Hant">經籍䉵詁并補遺</span>), <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Digest of the Meanings in the Classical and Other Books, with Supplement</i>, by, or rather under the superintendence of, <span xml:lang="zh-Latn-wadegile">Yüan Yüan</span> (see <cite>above</cite>). This has often been found useful. It is arranged according to the tones and rhymes like the characters in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Thesaurus</i>.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
